
Commonplace Book: a book into which notable extracts from other works
are copied for personal use.

Begun November 2016.
Successor to http://jon-jacky.github.io/home/links.html, Spring 2001 -- July 2017

Companion page on computing:
https://github.com/jon-jacky/home/blob/gh-pages/computing.md

Companion page on design, typography, and graphics:
https://github.com/jon-jacky/home/blob/gh-pages/design.md

Some of my own comments:
https://github.com/jon-jacky/home/blob/gh-pages/comments.md

 5 Oct 2021

- The Marxist and the Messiah by Terry Eagleton, review of *The Benjamin
  Files* by Fredric Jameson in *London Review of Books*, Sep. 9 2021, p. 27
  (no link):

  "... Walter Benjamin never wrote a book ... Instead, he lived a hand to
  mouth existence in his native Berlin as a cultural journalist,
  eventually leaving his fascist homeland in 1933 for Paris, where he
  stayed for the  most part until his death in 1940. ... The 'Theses on
  the Philosophy of History' can best be read as (his) jottings ... The
  fragmentary structure of the text reflects the ruined history from which
  it arises.  Benjamin was driven towards Marxism by the rise of fascism ...

  Benjamin was a modernist theorist rather than simply a theorist of
  modernism.  His writing is part of that cultural experiment, not just a
  commentary on it.   ... he was an anti-philosopher who felt the need to
  write differently to say what he meant ... Academic works are meant to
  be reasonably lucid, mostly conceptual in content, and written from a
  specific point of view. A good deal of modernist art, by contrast,
  prefers multiple viewpoints and discontinuous narratives.  Artists may
  opt for obscurity rather than lucidity, or prefer the image to the
  concept.  ...

  In modern art, obscurity can be a conscious strategy.  It is one of the
  ways in which the artwork can avoid being consumed too easily.  Poems
  need to thicken their textures and scramble their syntax if they are not
  to slip down too easily, which is the fate of the commodity.  Everyday
  language is no longer a medium of truth.  It has grown stale and
  threadbare, and only by wreaking violence on it can you force it to
  yield something of value. ...

  Everyday language unfolds in a linear way, and the general view is
  that history does too.  We think of the past as finished and the present
  as open-ended, but this is not Benjamin's opinion.  In his 'Theses on the
  Philosophy of History' it is the past that is incomplete, and the present
  that has a chance to bring it to fruition.  What happens, happens, and 
  does so irretrievably; but the meaning of such events is in the 
  custodianship of the living ... We can ensure that those in the past 
  who were defeated in their fight for justice and friendship did not 
  die in vain -- that in Benjamin's phrase, the names of those anonymous
  men and women will be mentioned in dispatches on Judgment Day.  The dead
  cannot literally be compensated for their suffering, but that suffering
  can be invested with new significance by our actions in the present ...

  The Messiah, he argues, will not arrive as the fulfillment of history
  but will reveal a constellation of moments woven into historical time,
  periods of political emergency in which there is a chance for justice
  for those whom the ruling powers hope to erase from the historical 
  record.  This montage of moments represents the history of the oppressed,
  which is as diffuse and discontinuous as a modernist work of art.
  Only with the coming of the Messiah can this history be recounted as a 
  coherent narrative, as the secret affinities between particular acts of
  resistance are laid bare.   What seemed futile and meaningless at the time
  will then become readable, like an encrypted text we can finally decipher."

18 Aug 2021

- The Ballad of Jimmy Garrison by Geoff Dyer, in *White Sands* (2016)
  p. 201 - 202 (no link):

  "It is so difficult to know whether you are giving up on a book because
  it really is unwritable or if you are just begin lazy, if you have
  rationalized the idea of its being unwriteable because you lack the
  stamina to stick  at it, to keep grinding it out.  Even if you have been
  writing for a long time -- *especially* if you have been writing for 
  a long time -- it is almost impossible to work through the layers of 
  subterfuge, the self-deceptions and self-exonerations that lead you to 
  abandoning a book and to forgive yourself for having done so.  

  Once you have made the decision to abandon ship, it requires a certain
  amount of will-power to persist with the abandonmnet, not to lapse back
  into sneaked looks at the manuscript, to learn to ignore the little
  glimmers of hope, to not to gnaw away at it until the 'it' becomes that
  which has been abandoned and that which is in the exhausted process of
  being revived.
  
  At some point complete withdrawal is the only solution.  After which, it
  is possible that some parts of what was abandoned and discarded can be 
  used in an entirely different way, in the creation of something new."

16 Aug 2021

- https://pages.gseis.ucla.edu/faculty/agre/notes/00-7-12.html - 
  Phil Agre, Critical Thinking, in Notes and Recommendations 12 July 2000.

  "... I finally comprehended the difference between critical thinking and
  its opposite.  Technical people are not dumb, quite the contrary, but
  technical curricula rarely include critical thinking in the sense I have
  in mind.  

  Critical thinking means that you can, so to speak, see your glasses.
  You can look at the world, or you can back up and look at the framework
  of concepts and assumptions and practices through which you look at the
  world.  Every such framework edits the world in some way; every such
  framework has its biases.  And no matter how carefully you think you
  define your words, most of your framework of concepts and assumptions
  and practices for looking at the world will be inherited from a long
  disciplinary and cultural tradition.

  If you can't see your glasses then you will have tunnel vision your
  whole life.  Yet you probably won't even notice, because your ways of
  looking at the world also define what counts as success, as progress, as
  a research result, and so on.  Not that critical thinking makes you
  omniscient: you're still wearing glasses even when you're looking at
  your glasses.  This (and not any sort of silly idealism) is what Derrida
  means when he says that a text has no outside.  But through scholarship
  and analysis you can do a lot better than just stumbling along with the
  glasses you got in school."

- https://pages.gseis.ucla.edu/faculty/agre/notes/96-11-8.html - 
  Phil Agre, Authoritarian Culture, in Notes and Recommendations 8 Nov 1996.

  "A while back, I came across an op-ed column addressed to teen-agers
  which purported to explain certain points about life.  The first of
  these points was, and I quote,

  - Life's not fair.  Get used to it.

  All of the points were like this: each of them presupposed that their
  reader held a putatively naive or self-serving opinion about life, and
  they proposed to set the reader straight in a remarkably nasty and
  disrespectful way.

  I view this article as part of a larger and very depressing trend: the
  return of authoritarian culture.  The purpose of authoritarian culture
  is to instil a mindless obedience to authority.  It employs two basic
  methods.  The first of these methods is stereotype: one's normal human
  tendencies to think critically and resist oppression are caricatured and
  ridiculed; endless stories are adduced to portray people who employ
  these innate faculties in a bad light; and labels such as "whining" and
  "complaining" and "victim" are liberally applied.

  The second method of authoritarian culture is the attempt to
  naturalize authority by hiding it behind large abstractions.  In this
  case, the abstraction in question is "life".  Having established that
  "life" is unfair, it becomes possible to label any protest against
  unfairness as a demand that the whole world conform to one's own
  immature whims.  These teenagers are counseled to "get used to it" and
  to reconcile themselves to a life of being treated unfairly.  No liberal
  nostrums about self-esteem here: this columnist's message was that
  nobody deserves to be treated with respect, and that it's arrogant to
  think otherwise. ...

  It is not surprising when people in authority employ such language.
  But authoritarian culture requires more: it requires that people
  internalize this language, applying it to themselves and dissociating
  all desire for justice and fair treatment.  We all have our failings,
  but we we cannot have a decent society unless everyone is treated with
  respect and judged with a reasonable regard for proportionality and due
  process.  Healthy people don't just "get used to" injustice.  Quite the
  contrary, genuine maturity begins with the skill and discipline of
  helping people organize to identify and overcome injustice.  Shame and
  ridicule are the least violent of the tools that have historically been
  employed to condemn people to passivity.  But they are also the most
  basic and, in the end, the most destructive."

10 Aug 2021

- *A Friend of the Earth* by T. C. Boyle (2000), p. 183-4 (no link):

  "There it is, the sun, angry and blistered in a sky the color of 
  a bleached robin's egg, steam rising, catfish wriggling, eighty-seven
  degrees already and it's only eight in the morning. ...  Anyway, I was
  up at six, the astonishing wallop of the meteorlogical change registering
  insistently in my back and hip joints, the pillow gummy with sweat, 
  my glasses misted over the minute I clapped them on the bridge of my nose.

  Global warming.  I remember the time when people debated not only the
  fact of it but the consequence.  It didn't sound so bad, on the face of it,
  to someone from Winnipeg, Grand Forks or Sakhalin Island.  The greenhouse
  effect, they called it.  And what are greenhouses but pleasant, warm, 
  nurturing places, where you can grow sago palms and hyroponic tomatoes
  during the deep freeze of the winter?  But that's not how it is at all.
  No, it's like leaving your car in the sun all day with the windows rolled
  up and then climbing in and discovering they've been sealed shut -- and the
  doors too.   The hotter it is, the more evaporation; the more evaporation,
  the hotter it gets, because the biggest greenhouse gas, by far and away,
  is water vapor.  That's how it is, and that's why for the next six months
  it's going to get so hot the Pulchris River will evaporate and rise back up 
  into the sky like a ghost in a long trailing shroud and all this muck will
  be baked to the texture of concrete.  Global warming.  It's a fact."

  This novel was published in 2000; it is set in the years 2025-26.  I
  thought of this passage during the "once-in-a-millenium heat dome"
  in June when temperatures in the Pacific Northwest exceeded 100 F,
  the highest ever recorded here.  Another heat wave is expected later
  this week.
  
22 Jul 2021

- The Empire Writes Back by William Dalrymple, review of *The Autobiography
  of an Unknown Indian* by Nirad C. Chaudhuri in *TLS* Jul 23 1999, p. 11
  (no link):
  
  "The high point of the book ... is the opening section describing
  Chaudhuri's upbringing in remote rural Bengal at the turn of the century
  ...  Here Chaudhuri writes with startling clarity about his physical
  surroundings: ... a green Eden of monsoon rain, thatched huts, and
  rotting vegetation ... It is in these descriptions of his own life, his
  own sensations and memories, that Chaudhuri is at his most mesmerizing ...

  Yet Chaudhuri is not content to merely describe the private, and
  ambitiously aims to give "more of a national than a personal history".
  ... These digressions are invariably a mistake. ... For Chaudhuri's
  historical and teleological digressions are almost always lecturesome
  and often pedantic and plain tiresome; the reader's heart sinks ...

  In his capacity for terminally self-indulgent meandering (if in no other),
  Chauduri's work bears an unexpected resemblance to that of a later and 
  equally difficult Indian genius: Salman Rushdie.  With both, one has the
  feeling that one is reading something that is important and improving as
  it is unquestionably unpalatable -- like drinking literary cod liver oil.
  These two very different writers also share a tendency to show off their
  learning and erudition in the most wearisome way.

  Yet if Chaudhuri can be hard work, then he is, like Rushdie, usually
  worth the effort.  Part of it is the sheer obstinate integrity and near-
  heroic defiance of convention that Chaudhuri represents.  Partly it is
  the testament this book gives to the long years of lonely isolation 
  undergone by this strange maverick; the hectoring and preening of the 
  historical digressions speak powerfully of a man unused to conversation,
  of someone starved of sympathetic intellectual company, or any sort of
  receptive audience.  

  Partly also it is the sheer oddity of the now lost hybrid culture 
  Chaudhuri represents ... (he was) a figure who could read and enjoy
  Shakespeare and Milton in the morning, then, in the evening, to the
  sound of "the beating of drums, cymbals, and gongs, and the frenzied 
  shouts of spectators", piously attend a bloody goat sacrifice ...

  Either way, for all his failings and idiosyncrasies, Chaudhuri is 
  a unique and intermittenly profound voice ..."

14 Jul 2021

- https://600transformer.blogspot.com/2012/10/professor-grumpys-historical-manifesto.html -
  Professor Grumpy's Historical Manifesto by Guy Halsall (2012) - 

  "What do people mean when they say that history is relevant? It's,  let's
  face it, usually a justification for modern history. To understand  the
  modern world, the argument runs, we have to understand its history.  So,
  to understand the problems, say, of Iraq, Afghanistan, or Ireland,  or
  the Balkans, we need to know the history of those regions. Sounds
  reasonable, but actually we don't. It's no more use to study the modern
  history of those regions than it is to study the end of the Roman
  world.

  Why? Well, let's look at the problem more closely. Let's take, for
  example, a modern Ulster Unionist or Irish Republican, or a Serbian
  nationalist (or a nationalist from any other area  including Scotland).
  Does a knowledge of the history of Serbia or Ireland help us understand
  his actions ... ? No it doesn't. For one thing,
  we'll  soon discover that the history that he uses to justify his case
  or  actions is cock-eyed and wrong. Does it help just to know the events
  he  makes reference to, that he keeps harping on about -- the Battle of
  Kosovo Pole or the Battle of Boyne, say? Does it help to know (the
  disillusioning facts about these events)?  No. It might get you  punched
  in the face but it won't help you understand why.

  Our modern nationalists aren't operating under compulsion from the Past.
  The past has no power; it's dead and gone. It can't make you do
  anything.  These people are choosing events from their understanding of
  the past  to justify what they are doing or what they want to do in the
  present.

  Another key point concerns the idea that history *had* to be like that,
  that it had to have particular outcomes, that the world we know was the
  natural outcome of all that. But nothing is 'just like that'. It
  doesn't have to be that way. To understand change you have to see all
  the other possibilities that were open and that could have come about.
  
  Many of the things we think of as natural ways of classifying the
  world aren't natural at all: like race and sexuality. If studying late
  antiquity does have an advantage it is in making that very clear. Late
  antique people didnt see colour as the basis for their way of
  organising the peoples of the world; they didn't have concepts of
  homosexuality or heterosexuality. Their ideas of sexuality were quite
  different.

  Clio, the muse of history ... will make you rethink everything you think
  you know ... She's not there to bring succour to your view of your
  country, or smooth over the bad stuff that it did ... She's there to
  stop you from falling victim to her evil twin, Myth. ... I want to free
  you from   feeling like the past controls us; that we have to base our
  identities   in the present upon myths. That means we don't have to feel
  guilty or apologise, either --- just to be aware; to understand."

7 Jun 2021

- *My Past and Thoughts* by Alexander Herzen (1885), translated
  by Constance Garnett (1968). Excerpted as 'A Russian Thinker in Exile'
  in *The Oxford Book of London* ed. Paul Bailey (1995), p. 108 - 109 (no
  link):

  "... There is no town in the world which is more adapted to training
  one away from people and training one into solitude than London. ...
  One who knows how to live alone has nothing to fear from the tedium 
  of London.  The life here, like the air here, is bad for the weak, for
  the frail, for one who seeks a prop outside himself, for one who seeks
  welcome, sympathy, attention; the moral lungs here must be as strong
  as the physical lungs, whose task it is to separate oxygen from the 
  smokey fog. ...

  In the evening, when my son had gone to bed, I usually went out for 
  a walk ... One city, full-fed, went to sleep: the other, hungry, was
  not yet awake ... where every night a hundred thousand men know not
  where they will lay their heads, and the police often find women and
  children dead of hunger beside hotels where one cannot dine for less than
  two pounds. ...

  ... Though I had made up my mind to work, for a long time I did nothing,
  or did not do what I wanted to do.   The idea with which I had come
  to London, to seek the tribunal of my own people, was a sound and right
  one. ... To whom, in fact, are we to appeal for judgment, for the 
  re-establishment of truth, for the unmasking of falsehood?  It is not
  for us to litigate in the court of our enemies, who judge by other
  principles, by laws which we do not recognize.

  ... To take the law in one's own hands is to snatch back by force what
  has been taken by force, and so restore the balance; vengeance is just
  as sound and simple a human feeling as gratitude; but neither revenge nor
  taking the law into one's own hands explains anything.  It may happen that
  a clear explanation is what matters most to a man.  The re-establishment
  of truth may be dearer to him than revenge. ..."

 1 Jun 2021, 5 Jun 2021

- http://www.tomandmaria.com/Tom/Writing/CACMInnovatorsAssemble.pdf - 
  Innovators Assemble: Ada Lovelace, Walter Isaacson, and the
  Superheroines of Computing, by Thomas Haigh and Mark Priestley in
  *Communications of the ACM*, Sep 2015, vol 58, no 9, pps. 20 -- 27.

  "The   fastest-selling   history   of  computing  book  ever  published
  is  Walter  Isaacson's  *The  Innovators:  How  a Group of Hackers,
  Geniuses, and Geeks Created  the  Digital  Revolution.* ...
  (A) distinctive feature of Isaacsons  book  is  his  stress  on
  the  contribution  of  women  to  innovation  in  computing.  He
  foregrounds  a  trio  of  coding superwomen, and centered the
  promotional campaign for the book on the claim that he was avenging
  brilliant but  defenseless  women  who  had  been  unjustly   erased
  from   history. ...  
  According   to   Isaacson,   men   were   good   at   hardware,   but
  only   women   were  smart  enough  to  appreciate  the  need for
  software. ...

  *Ada Lovelace*

  ... Lovelace  is  remembered  for  her  collaboration    with    Charles
  Babbage    to    publicize  the  mechanical  calculators  he  designed
  and  attempted  to  build  from  the  1820s  onward. ...
  (Lovelace wrote) a detailed  discussion of how to use (Babbage's) Analytical
  Engine to calculate the Bernoulli numbers. This work,  summarized  in  a
  large  table  describing  the  calculation,  has  long  been
  understood    as    a    computer    program    *avant la lettre*. That
  made Lovelace "the first  programmer" ...

  Lovelace   has   been   celebrated   as   much  for  her  visionary
  asides  as  her  mathematical accomplishments. She imagined  a  version
  of  the  Analytical  Engine  that  would  allow  mechanical
  representation    of    "the    fundamental   relations   of   pitched
  sounds   in   the  science  of  harmony"  and  "compose  elaborate  and
  scientific  pieces  of  music."  These  remarks  carry  an  undeniable
  frisson    of    prescience,    leading  science  writer  and
  television  presenter Steven Johnson to the idea that  Lovelace  was  a
  time  travelling  inventor who, like Leonardo da Vinci and  Charles
  Darwin,  somehow  existed  outside  her  own  time.
  In  a  promotional  interview  for  the  fashion  section  of  the
  *New  York  Times*,  Isaacson  claimed   "Ada   Lovelace   defined   the
  digital age", arguing with a wave that seemed  to  "encompass  all  of
  Silicon  Valley  and  the  techies  sitting  around  us" that "If it wasn't
  for Ada Lovelace, theres   a   chance   that   none   of   this   would
  even   exist."   This   hand   waving  is  not  untypical,  as  is  the
  failure  to    distinguish    between    imagining    something  and
  causing  that  thing  to  come about. 

  What does it mean for Isaacson to call Lovelace  an  essential
  precondition  to  the   existence   of   today's   tech   world?
  Logically,  it  means  those  who  created  later technologies drew
  directly on her work  with  Babbage,  and  indeed  that  without  them
  nobody  would  ever  have  thought  of  programming  a  computer. ...
  However, expert historians  have  been  unable  to  find  any 
  substantial  influence  of  Babbage  on  the  designers of early computers.

  Turning      to      the      specifics      of      Lovelace's
  notes,       we       challenge       the     common
  characterization     of     Lovelaces tabular presentation of the
  Bernoulli  calculation  as  a  "program."
  Babbage  intended  his  computer  to  read  and  execute  instructions
  one  at  a  time  from  a  deck  of    "operation    cards."    The
  famous    table  is  not  a  specification  for  a  card  deck  to
  compute  the  Bernoulli  numbers.  Instead,  as  Lovelace  explained,
  it  "presents  a  complete  simultaneous  view of all the successive
  changes the various storage units of the Analytical Engine would pass
  through" in computing  the  specific  number  B7. ...  
  In    modern    terminology,    the    table    might  best  be
  described  as  a  trace  of  the machine's expected operation. ...
  In  fact  the  idea  of  a  program  as  we  now  understand it did not
  yet exist. ...

  Lovelace  was  part  of  her  own  time,  not  a  visitor  from  the
  future  or  a  lone  superhero    who    invented    programming  and
  created  the  modern  world. ...
  Her  instincts,  and  her  tragic  personal  story,  were  similarly
  emblematic   of   their   time.   She  was  Romantic  with  a  capital
  "R,"  befitting  her  status  as  a  daughter  of  Byron  and  echoing
  the  era's  belief  in  centrality  of  tortured  genius  and  creative
  passion to greatness in both arts and natural science.

  *Grace Hopper*

  ... On  page  117  Isaacson  credits  Hopper  as  the  technical   lead   in
  coordinating   the   creation   of   COBOL,   a   hugely   important
  standard  language  for  business  programming ...
  
  (Isaacson) slights several women who, unlike  Hopper,  were  on  the
  technical  committee  in  question.  Among
  them is Jean Sammett, who made the largest single contribution to the
  design  of  COBOL.  Sammet  has  stated  that  Hopper  was  not  the
  mother,  creator,  or  developer  of  COBOL,  an  idea  Hopper
  reportedly  endorsed  by  calling  herself  the  grandmother  of  COBOL
  rather than its creator.

  This is an example of what sociologist of science Robert K. Merton
  called the   Matthew   Effect,   the   tendency   for  the  most  famous
  person  involved  in  any  collaborative  project,  however
  peripherally,   to   be   remembered   by   the  public  as  the  key
  contributor. ...
  Over time the famous become more famous, while the moderately   well
  known   are   forgotten. ...
  This is particularly true of those holding  distinctions  where  the
  supply  is  deliberately limited, such as ... 
  the  winners  of  the  Nobel  Prize.  It  seems  to  us  that  a
  process  of  natural  selection,  in  which  a  large  pool  of
  eligible  pioneers compete for a handful of positions as female role
  models, is creating a similar dynamic.

  *The Women of ENIAC*

  Isaacson   writes   at   length   on   The   Women   of   ENIAC,   and
  excerpted   this  part  of  *The  Innovators*  in *Fortune* magazine  as
  part  of  his  launch  campaign.    
  ENIAC,    the    Electronic    Numerical  Integrator  and  Computer,
  is  remembered by historians as the first general-purpose     electronic
  digital     computer. ...
  In   recent   years, however, (ENIAC) has   been  best  known  as  a
  computer  programmed   by   women. ...

  Isaacson's  retelling  of  their  story  is sourced primarily from (Jean)
  Bartik's engaging  memoir,  *Pioneer  Programmer* and  from  a  number
  of  oral  history  interviews.  He  observed  that  while  "the   boys
  with   their   toys   thought   that   assembling   the   hardware   was
  the  most  important  task,  and  thus  a  man's  job"  in  fact  "all  the
  programmers  who  created  the  first  general-purpose    computer were
  women."

  One  startling  fact  was  overlooked  by    Isaacson    and    almost
  everyone    else   who   has   written   about   ENIAC.   The  cliche
  that  the  machine  was  assembled   by   men   but   programmed   by
  women  is  just  not  true.  Dozens  of  women,  employed  as  "wiremen",
  "assemblers",  and  "technicians"  worked  shifts    through    1944    and
  1945    to    build  ENIAC,  threading  miles  of  wire  through   the
  machine   and   soldering   approximately   half   a   million   joints.
  Other   women   drew   blueprints   and   helped    with
  administration.    While    Bartik  and  her  colleagues  were  given
  belated  recognition  for  their  work  on  ENIAC,  more  than  50
  women  worked  on  the  machine  in  1944  alone.  Their  names  are
  preserved  only  in  the  project's  accounting  records  and  personnel 
  forms. They are truly forgotten.

  We   also   believe   the   word   "programming" does not do a good job
  of capturing  the  actual  work  of  Bartik  and  her  colleagues.  When
  programming  developed  as  a  distinct  job,  in  the  mid-1950s,  it
  was  generally  separated  from  the  work  of  operating  the
  computer  or  any  ancillary  punched  card   units.   Programmers   sat
  with   pencils  and  coding  pads,  writing  instructions. These were
  punched onto cards  by  keypunch  women,  the  data  entry  clerks  of
  their  day.  Operators  tended to the machine itself, preparing  the
  computer  and  its  peripherals for a job, loading the appropriate card
  and  tape  media,  and  extracting  printed output. The  women  of
  ENIAC  combined  elements  of  all  three  roles,  but  operations
  work   was   what   they   were   hired  to  do  and  it  occupied  most
  of  their  time  with  the  computer. ...

  The  initial  cohort  of  six  operators  had to understand how ENIAC
  worked, so  they  could  set  it  up  for  a  new  job,
  which  involved  many  hours  of  plugging  cables  and  setting
  switches,  and  monitor  its  progress.  Because  of  this  expertise
  they  also  played  an  important  preparatory  role  in  many  of  the
  applications  run  on  ENIAC,  partnering  with  scientific  and
  mathematical  users to figure out the set-up needed to  configure  the
  machine  to  carry  out  the  appropriate  series  of  mathematical
  operations.  These  set-ups  implemented   loops,   subroutines,   and
  the   other  elements  we  now  associate  with  programs    (although
  they    were    recorded  visually,  as  a  schematic  of  the  switch
  and  wiring  settings  needed  on  ENIACs  various  units,  rather  than
  as  textual instruction codes). It  is  this  preparatory  work  that
  has  caused   them   to   be   remembered   as   programmers ...

  Our   intent   is   not   to   belittle   the   very  real
  contributions  of  the  ENIAC  operators  to  computing  history,  but
  to  argue  that  forcing  them  into  the  role of the "first
  programmers," as is commonly  done,  hides  most  of  the  reality  of
  their  actual  work.  Operating ENIAC, and its ancillary punched card
  machines,   was   highly   skilled   work  that  was  absolutely  vital
  to  the  machines  success.  To  this  day  programming accounts for a
  fairly small proportion of overall IT work, and the demand    for
  system    administrators,    network   technicians,   facilities
  management  staff,  and  other  hands-on  IT  practitioners  is  greater
  than  ever.  By  the  1960s,  however,  computer  operations work was
  seen as a lower paid and lower  skilled  occupation -- blue-collar  shift
  work against the white-collar work of  programming.  Perhaps
  celebrating  hands-on operations work would mislead  impressionable
  young  women.  As  Wendy  Hui  Kyong  Chun  has  noted,  "reclaiming
  these  women  as  the  first  programmers... glosses  over  the
  hierarchies... among   operators,   coders, and analysts."  Remembering
  the ENIAC   operators   only   as   programmers  implies  gender
  matters  to  history but social class does not. 

  *Conclusion*

  A great deal is at stake here. Women are conspicuous  by  their  absence
  in  computer  science  classrooms  and  in  the  programming teams,
  data centers, and computing  research  labs  of  America. ...

  History  is  playing  an  increasingly  visible  role  in  this
  struggle. ...
  One  widely  held  concern  is  that  girls  are  not exposed to images
  of female programmers   or   information   technology  professionals. ...
  They have little reason to assume that software development is work
  they would find interesting or be good at.

  The past has therefore been mined in  search  of  women  who  might
  provide   girls   with   inspiring   counter-examples.   The   goal
  of   convincing   women   to   enter   computing   might   sometimes
  seem   at   odds   with   the   responsibility   of   historians   to
  provide  accurate  and  nuanced  stories.  In such a battle the force
  of numbers would   not   be   with   the   historians,   who  find
  intrinsic  value  in  the  past  of a field that is relentlessly focused
  on the future. ...
  
  We believe good history is not just important  to  specialists,  and
  that  it  will  ultimately  prove  more  inspiring  and   more relevant
  than   superhero   stories (like) Isaacson's book ...
  Stories  of  this  kind  inflate  their  own  importance,  by
  pretending  a  certain  idea,  person,  or  invention  has  direct  and
  singular  responsibility  for  some  hugely  complex  chain  of  later
  events  that   leads   to   our   modern digital   world.  Their
  authors  are  fixated  on  firsts and origins, and glorify flashes of
  abstract  insight  over  slow  and  incremental technological change
  driven by the needs of users.

  The  conception  of  history  as  the  deeds of a few great men has
  problems that are too fundamental to correct  simply  by  elevating  a
  few  great  women to the pantheon. Indeed, this strategy devalues many
  of the contributions made by women. Nobody has
  chosen  to  celebrate  "The  Key  Punch  Operators  Who  Invented  the
  Digital  Universe"   or  "The   Lone   Computer   Assembler   Who   Built
  the   Modern   Computer".  The  obsession  with  discovering the first
  coders, intended to empower  women,  has  obscured  the  importance  of
  other  kinds  of  computer-related  labor  that  was  carried  out by
  women for decades. The quest for "girls who code" is erasing the history
  of "women who operate". One of the  reasons  such  work  was  seen  as
  low status and unimportant is that it was carried out by women, and any
  attempt  to  challenge  historical  sexism  should dispute that
  assumption rather  than  tacitly  endorsing  it. ...
  
  Stories   about   superheroes   make   great entertainment ...
  The superhero narrative is not,  however,  the  best  way
  to  understand   history.  Isaacson's  celebration  of  Ada  Lovelace,
  Grace Hopper,  and  the Women of ENIAC as the creators of  computer
  programming  is  part  of  a  much  broader  movement  to  make  these
  women into recruiting sergeants for   computer   science.   The colorful
  feats  sometimes  attributed  to  these  women  can overshadow  their
  actual  historical  contributions,  which  were rather  more  nuanced
  and  rather  less  dependent on superpowers. In particular,  the
  concept  of  programming  has been awkwardly projected back in time, in
  a way that misrepresents their accomplishments and squanders the  chance
  to  celebrate  a  broad  range  of  computer-related occupations    such
  as  mathematical  analysis,  operations  work, and management.

  More  generally,  we  run  the  risk  of  hiding  a complex  historical
  tapestry,  full of thousands of little figures carrying   out  many
  vital  tasks,  behind  a  gaudy  poster  depicting  a small  team  of
  superheroes.   The   quest   for   genius devalues the vital
  contributions of  millions  who  are  merely  creative, intelligent,
  hard-working,  and  lucky  enough to be in the right place at the right
  time. Superhero stories have little time for ordinary humans, who exist
  only to be endangered or rescued. Reducing the story of women in
  computing  to  the  heroics  of  a  handful  of  magical individuals
  draws  attention  away   from   real   human   experience and,
  counterproductively,    suggests    that   only   those   with
  superhuman   abilities need apply."
  
  Many other articles by these authors about computing history at
  http://www.tomandmaria.com/Tom/Home

- *London Lights: The Minds that Moved the City that Shook the World,
  1805 - 1851* by James Hamilton (2007), from chapter 5, A Mutton-Chop
  at 5 O'Clock, pps. 110 - 111, 114 - 115 (no link):

  "Babbage's parties were large affairs, designed to entertain friends
  and influence reluctant politicians in his efforts to raise capital
  to develop his Difference Engine, the most complex piece of mechanical
  equipment yet made. ... a calculating engine ... the size of a large 
  garden shed. 

  There were dozens of people at each of Babbages's events. (Geologist)
  Charles Lyell confided to Charles Darwin, 'Babbage's parties are the
  best in the way of literary people in London -- and ... there is
  a good mixture of pretty women.'  The rooms in his house (contained) a
  working section of the Difference Engine in polished brass in one of the 
  rooms, and, after 1834 when he bought her at auction ... a shining silver
  clockwork woman in the other.  'The figure moved her arms and head most
  gracefully, and even moved her eyes, and almost smiled, as if she was 
  aumused with your astonishment.' Most guests preferred the dancing woman
  to the Difference Engine: on one evening only two foreign visitors admired
  the Engine, while everyone else crowded to watch the dancer.  'In that room
  -- Enland,' Babbage remarked.  'Look again at this -- two foreigners.'"

  "Ada must have first attended a Babbage soiree in March 1834 ...
  Ada (b. Dec. 1815) and Babbage (b. 1791) became close friends, and by 
  November Babbage, having recognized Ada's mathematical dexterity,
  lent his printed and illustrated account of the Difference Engine for
  her to study ...
  
  Ada Byron began to make a habit of going to Babbage's with the Somervilles
  (mathematician and popular science author Mary and her husband William).
  Ada Byron was intense by nature.  A highly articulate, overwrought
  mathematical genius from a high social background, she attended lectures
  at the Royal Institute, routs in glittering ballrooms, soirees at Babbage's,
  and, aged seventeen in 1833, was presented to the King and Queen at court.
  Her natural brilliance in the abstract language of mathematics that few
  understood, her disturbed upbringing as Byron's daughter, and the elevated
  position in society it was her lot to display and maintain created a 
  confused and uncertain young woman.  'You know I am a d--d odd animal!'
  she wrote to Mary Somerville's son ... 'But if you knew one-half of the *harum-scarum*
  extraordinary things I do, you would certainly incline to the idea that 
  I have a spell of *some* sorts about me.  I am positive that no other 
  *she* creature of *my years could* possibly attempt many of my everyday
  performances with any impunity.' It was the rare piece of real good 
  fortune for Ada, however, that she had the sensible and structured example
  of Mary and William Somerville's family life to balance her self-absorption,
  the insistence of her many suitors, and Charles Babbage's frantic 
  self-certainty. ..."  

 7 May 2021

- *The Waning of the Middle Ages* by Johan Huizinga (1919), translated by
  Frederick Hopman (1924).  From Chapter 1, The Violent Tenor of Life, 
  p. 9 - 31 (no link):

  "To the world when it was half a thousand years younger, the outlines
  of all things seemed more clearly marked than to us.  The contrast
  between suffering and joy, between adversity and happiness, appeared 
  more striking.  All experience had yet to the minds of men the directness
  and absoluteness of the pleasure and pain of child-life. ...

  Calamities and indigence were more afflicting than at present; it was
  more difficult to guard against them, and to find solace.  Illness and
  health presented a more striking contrast; the cold and darkness of winter
  were more real evils.  Honors and riches were relished with greater avidity
  and contrasted more vividly with the surrounding misery.  We, at the present
  day, can hardly understand the keenness with which a fur coat, a good fire
  on the hearth, a soft bed, a glass of wine, were formerly enjoyed.

  Then, again, all things of life were of a proud or cruel publicity.
  Lepers sounded their rattles and went about in processions, beggars 
  exhibited their deformity and their misery in churches. ... Executions
  and other public acts of justice, hawking, marriages and funerals, were
  all announced by cries and processions, songs and music. ...

  A medieval town did not lose itself in extensive suburbs of factories
  and villas; girded by its walls, it stood out as a compact whole, bristling
  with innumerable turrets.  However threatening and tall the houses of
  noblemen and merchants might be, in the aspect of the town the lofty mass 
  of the churches always remained dominant.

  The contrast between silence and sound, darkness and light, like that
  between summer and winter, was more strongly marked than it is in our lives.
  The modern town hardly knows silence or darkness in their purity, nor the
  effect of a solitary light or a single distant cry.
  
  All things presenting themselves to the mind in violent contrasts and
  impressive forms, lent a tone of excitement and passion to everyday life
  and tended to produce that perpetual oscillation between despair and
  distracted joy, between cruelty and pious tenderness which characterize
  life in the middle ages. 

  The frequent processions, too, were a continual source of pious
  agitation, When the times were evil, as often they were, processions
  were seen winding along, day after day, for weeks on end. ... All
  went barefooted and fasting. ... A great many small children were
  always among them. ...

  Then there were the entries of princes, arranged with all the
  resources of art and luxury belonging to the age.  And lastly, most
  frequent of all, one might almost say, uninterrupted, the
  executions.  The cruel excitement and coarse compassion raised by an
  execution formed an important item in the spiritual food of the
  common people.  They were spectacular plays with a moral.  For
  horrible crimes the law invented atrocious punishments ... When the
  criminals were great lords, the common people had the satisfaction
  of seeing rigid justice done, and at the same time finding the
  inconstancy of fortune exemplified more strikingly than in any
  sermon or picture. ...

  Rarer than processions or executions were the sermons of itinerant
  preachers, coming to shake people by their eloquence.  The modern reader
  of newspapers can no longer conceive the violence of impression caused
  by the spoken word on an ignorant mind lacking mental food. ... 
  Thinking that (a renowned friar) would preach once more at Saint Denis
  on Sunday, the people flocked thither on Saturday evening, and passed the
  night in the open, to secure good seats.

  The diatribes of the preachers against dissoluteness and luxury produced
  violent excitement which was translated into action. ... At the summons of
  a famous preacher, men and women would hasten to bring cards, dice, finery,
  ornaments, and burn them with great pomp. ...

  All this general facility of emotions, of tears and spiritual upheavals,
  must be borne in mind in order to conceive how fully how violent and
  high strung was life at that period. ... In more than one respect life
  still had the colors of a fairy-story, that is to say, it assumed those
  colors in the eyes of contemporaries.  The court chroniclers were men of
  culture, and they observed the princes, whose deeds they recorded, at 
  close quarters, yet even they give these records a somewhat archaic, 
  hieratic air. ...

  Although in reality the mechanism of government had already assumed rather
  complicated forms, the popular mind pictures it in simple and fixed figures.
  The current political ideas are those of the Old Testament, of the romaunt
  and the ballad.  The kings of the time are reduced to a certain number of
  types, every one of which corresponds, more or less, to a literary motif.
  There is the wise and just prince, the prince deceived by evil counsellors, 
  the prince who avenges the dishonour of his family, the unfortunate prince
  to whom his servants remain faithful.  In the mind of the people political 
  questions are reduced to stories of adventure. ... 

  A present day reader, studying the history of the Middle Ages based on 
  official documents, will never sufficiently realize the extreme excitability
  of the medieval soul. ... There can be no doubt that no other political
  motive could be better understood by the people than the primitive motives
  of hatred and vengeance. ... The desire to discover economic causes is to
  some degree a craze with us, and sometimes leads us to forget a much simpler
  psychological explanation of the facts.

  Every page of medieval history proves the spontaneous and passionate 
  character of the sentiments of loyalty and devotion to the prince. ...
  It might be thought that the schism, which had no dogmatic cause, could
  hardly awaken religious passions in countries distant from Avignon and
  of Rome, in which the two popes were known only by name.  Yet in fact 
  it immediately engendered a fanatical hatred, such as exists between
  the faithful and infidels. ...  a French political agent, arriving at
  Utrecht (in Holland) about Easter, could not find a priest there willing 
  to admit him to the communion service, "because they said I was a schismatic
  and believed in Benedict the anti-pope."

  The emotional character of party sentiments and of fidelity was
  further heightened by the powerfully suggestive effect of all the
  outward signs of these divergences: liveries, colors, badges, party
  cries. ...  Even priests, women and children wore distinctive
  signs. ...

  In the blind passion with which people followed their lord or their party,
  the unshakable sentiment of right, characteristic of the Middle Ages,
  is trying to find expression.  Man at that time is convinced that right
  is absolutely fixed and certain.  Justice should prosecute the unjust 
  everywhere and to the end.  Reparaton and retribution have to be extreme,
  and assume the character of revenge.  In this exagerrated need of justice,
  primitive barbarism, pagan at bottom, blends with the Christian conception
  of society.  The Church ... in adding to the primitive need of retribution
  the horror of sin, had to a certain extent, stimulated the sentiment of 
  justice.  And sin, to violent and impulsive spirits, was only too frequently
  another name for what their enemies did.  The barbarous idea of retaliation
  was reinforced by fanaticism.  The chronic insecurity made the greatest
  possible severity on the part of the public authorities desirable. ... Thus
  it was natural that the Middle Ages should become the special period of
  judicial cruelty.  That the criminal deserved his punishment was not 
  doubted for a moment.  The popular sense of justice always sanctioned the
  most rigorous penalties.  ... 

  What strikes us in this judicial cruelty  and the joy the the people
  felt at it, is rather brutality than perversity. Torture and executions
  are enjoyed by the spectators like an entertainment at a fair. ...

  The Middle Ages knew nothing of all those ideas which have rendered our
  sentiment of justice timid and hesitating: doubts as to the criminal's 
  responsibility; the conviction that society is, to a certain extent, the
  accomplice of the individual; the desire to reform instead of inflicting
  pain; and, we many even add, the fear of judicial errors. Or rather these
  ideas were implied, unconsciously, in the very strong and direct feeling
  of pity and forgiveness which alternated with extreme severity. Instead
  of lenient penalties, inflicted with hesitation, the Middle Ages knew
  two extremes: the fulness of cruel punishment, and mercy.  When the 
  condemned criminal is pardoned, the question whether he deserves it for
  any special reasons is hardly asked; for mercy has to be gratuitous, like
  the mercy of God. ...

  The contrast of cruelty and of pity return at every turn in the manners
  and customs of the Middle Ages.  On the one hand, the sick, the poor, the
  insane, are objects of a deeply moved pity, born of a feeling of fraternity
  ... on the other hand, they are treated with incredible hardness or cruelly
  mocked. ... 

  In the harshness of those times there is something ingenuous which almost
  forbids us to condemn it.  ... So violent and motley was life, that it bore
  the mixed smell of blood and roses.  The men of that time always oscillate
  between the fear of hell and the most naive joy, between cruelty and 
  tenderness, between harsh asceticism and insane attachment to the delights
  of this world, between hatred and goodness, always running to extremes."

  "Between hellish oppression and the most childish amusements, between
  horrible hard-heartedness and tearful tenderness, the populace staggers
  like a giant with a child's head ... the people lived in extremes."

  That last paragraph with "like a giant" is quoted from another
  translation in Wheel of Fortune by David Horspool in *TLS*, Apr 30,
  2021, p. 10. The following article on p. 11-12, Love and Death by
  Alexander Murray, is a review of the new translaton by Diane Webb,
  called *Autumntide of the Middle Ages*.  Murray writes:
  
  "(*Autumntide*) is all but bare of references to contemporary academics --
  which may be one reason it escaped their obsolesence.  Instead, Huizinga
  lived day and night with his medieval witnesses, and wrote what they told
  him as it struck his own mind and heart. ..."

- From *Ordalie* to Ordure by Paul Freedman, review of *The Axe and the 
  Oath: Ordinary Life in the Middle Ages* by Robert Fossier (2010) in *TLS*, 
  date and page lost (no link):

  "Opposing the mainstream tendency of both popular and academic
  depictions, Fossier emphasizes the similarity between people now and
  those who lived during the European Middle Ages.  Despite our
  arrogant assumption of superiority, our lives are hemmed in by the
  same worries, unpredictability, limitations and even diversions as
  those experienced by medieval Europeans.  ...

  As anyone who has taught the subject knows, students are all too
  willing to hear that people in the distant past wanted to be like us
  and are to be pitied because they weren't.  For Fossier, it is not
  so much that medieval life was as rich and diverting as our own, but
  that our world is more wretched than we are willing to admit. ...
  *The Axe and the Oath* conveys a sense of the tragedies, or at least
  the discomforts, of medieval life, but it does not consign them
  safely to the past.  Instead Robert Fossier offers a suggestive and
  gamely pessimistic view of the basic facts of human frailty."

12 Apr 2021

- *99 Novels: The Best in English Since 1939* by Anthony Burgess (1985),
  *Introduction*, p. 18-20 (no link):

  "George Orwell ... said that, with any author he found sympathetic,
  a portrait of the author seemed to rise from the page -- not necessarily
  like the author as he really was but more the author as he ought to be.
  ... The implication here is that the personaility of the novelist is
  important to us -- the personality as revealed in his work and not in his
  private life (the private lives of many artists do not bear looking at).
  ... Some novelists, like Gustave Flaubert and James Joyce, have tried to
  obliterate themselves entirely from their fictions, seeking the anonymity
  of the divine creator, but they reveal themselves in style and imagery and
  cannot altogether hide their attitudes toward their characters.  It is clear
  that Joyce is on the side of Bloom, though he never intrudes to make 
  a comment, as Thackeray and Dickens always did. ... 

  We do not demand of an author that he be an intellectual ... but we
  have a right to intelligence, a knowledge of the human soul, a certain
  decency -- quite apart from professional skill.  Probably this imputation
  of decency is important: all great novels have been about people trying 
  to be kinder, more tolerant. ...  This does not mean that authors have to
  be nice to their characters. ... But the way of tragedy is the way of
  arousing not only terror but pity.  Some characters have to suffer to 
  demonstrate the horror of life, but the author takes only a technical	
  pleasure in delineating those sufferings.  Novels are about the human
  condition, which is not easy, and how, if possible, to cope with it.
  The author is concerned about this, and he is concerned that you, the 
  reader, be concerned.

  It is very hard indeed to devise universal parameters for the novel.
  ... But I do know that we carry a scale of values whereby we know
  that *Anna Karenina* is a great novel and *The Carpetbaggers* an inferior
  one, and that our standards have something to do with the management of
  language and concern with the human personality.  Sometimes the management
  of language will be so remarkable that we will be prepared to forgive the
  lack of human interest; sometimes character interest will condone verbal
  and structural incompetence.  Judging a novel is a rule-of-thumb matter;
  we cannot appeal to any aesthetic tribunal which will lay down universal
  laws.

  Anyway, all of the novelists listed here have added something to our 
  knowledge of the human condition (sleeping or waking), have managed
  language well, have clarified the motivations of action, and have 
  sometimes expanded the bounds of imagination.  And they entertain, or
  divert, which means to turn our faces away from the repetitive patterns
  of daily life and look at humanity and the world with a new interest and
  even joy. ... We want to entertain, surprise, and present the preoccupations
  of real human beings through invented ones."

 9 Feb 2021

- *War and Peace* by Leo Tolstoy (1869), translated by Louise and Aylmer 
  Maude (1923), Book III, Chapter VII (no link):
  
  "... (Boris) asked him to tell them how and where he got his wound.
  This pleased Rostov and he began talking about it, and as he went on 
  became more and more animated.  He told them of his Schon Grabern affair
  just as those who have taken part in a battle generally do describe it,
  that is, as they would like it to have been, as they have heard it described
  by others, and as sounds well, but not at all as it really was.  Rostov was
  a truthful young man and would on no account have told a deliberate lie.
  He began his story meaning to tell everything just as it happened, but 
  imperceptibly, involuntarily, and inevitably he lapsed into falsehood.
  If he had told the truth to his hearers -- who like himself had often heard
  stories of attacks and had formed a definite idea of what an attack was and
  were expecting to hear just such a story -- they would either not have 
  believed him or, still worse, would have thought that Rostov was himself to
  blame since what generally happens to narrators of cavalry attacks had not
  happened to him.  He could not tell them simply that every one went at a trot,
  and that he fell off his horse and sprained his arm and then ran as hard as
  he could from a Frenchman into the wood.  Besides, to tell everything as it
  really happened it would have been necessary to make an effort of will to
  tell only what happened.  It is very difficult to tell the truth, and young
  people are rarely capable of it.  His hearers expected a story of how beside
  himself and all aflame from excitement, he had flown like a storm at the 
  square, cut himself in, slashed right and left, how his sabre had tasted
  flesh, and he had fallen exhausted, and so on.  And so he told them all
  that."

22 - 28 Dec 2020

- *The Age of Revolution 1789 - 1848* by Eric Hobsbawm (1962), (no link):

  *Introduction* p. 1:

  "Words are witnesses which often speak louder than documents.  Let us consider
  a few English words which were invented, or gained their modern meanings,
  substantially in the sixty years with which this volume deals. They are such
  words as 'industry', 'industrial', 'factory', 'middle class', 'working class',
  'capitalism' and 'socialism'.  They include 'aristocracy' as well as 'railway',
  'liberal' and 'conservative' as political terms, 'nationality, 'scientist' and
  'engineer', 'proletariat' and (economic) 'crisis'.  'Utilitarian' and 
  'statistics', 'sociology' and several other names of modern sciences, 
  'journalism' and 'ideology', are all coinages or adaptations of this period.
  So is 'strike' and 'pauperism'.

  To imagine the modern world without these words (i.e. without the things and
  concepts for which they provide names) is to measure the profundity of the
  revolution which broke out between 1789 and 1848 (the French Revolution of
  1789 and the contemporaneous (British) Industrial Revolution) ..."

  Chapter 2, *The Industrial Revolution*, p. 27 - 29, 36, 38, 41, 46, 48:

  - *From this foul drain the greatest stream of human industry flows out to
    fertilize the whole world.  From this filthy sewer pure gold flows.
    Here humanity attains its most complete development and its most brutish,
    here civilization works its miracles and civilized man is turned almost
    into a savage.* - A. de Toqueville on Manchester in 1835.

  Let us begin with the industrial revolution. ... some time in the 1780s,
  and for the first time in human history, the shackles were taken off the
  productive power of human societies, which henceforth became capable of
  the constant, rapid and up to the present limitless multiplication of
  men, goods, and services. ... By any reckoning this was probably the
  most important event in world  history, at any rate since the invention
  of agriculture and cities. ...

  ... The expansion of industry produced fantastic rates of profit.  
  'It was not five per cent or ten per cent', a later English politician
  was to say, with justice, 'but hundreds per cent and thousands per cent
  that made the fortunes of Lancashire.' ...

  Its most serious consequences were social.  The transition to the new
  economy created misery and discontent. ... (Wages) could be compressed
  by direct wage-cutting, by the substitution of cheaper machine-tenders
  for dearer skilled workers, and by the competition of the machine.
  ... And indeed money wages fell steadily ... But there was a physiological
  limit to such reductions, unless the laborers were actually to starve,
  as of course the 500,000 handloom weavers did. ... Virtually untaxed,
  the middle classes continued to accumulate among the hungry populace,
  whose hunger was the counterpart to their accumulation.  ... 

  In terms of economic productivity this social transformation was an
  immense success, in terms of human suffering, a tragedy ..."

  Chapter 10, *The Career Open to Talent*, p. 185 - 186, 189, 198:

  "... the iron plough of industrialization multiplied its hardfaced crops of 
  businessmen under the rainy clouds of the North.  ... The new men from
  the provinces were a formidable army ... organized against both
  proletariat and landlords. ... They were self-made men, or at least 
  men of modest origins who owed little to birth, family or formal 
  higher education ... They were rich and getting richer by the year.
  They were above all imbued with the ferocious and dynamic self-confidence
  of those whose careers prove to them that divine providence, science and
  history have combined to present the earth to them on a platter.

  The crucial achievement of the two revolutions was thus that they
  opened careers to talent, or at any rate to energy, shrewdness, 
  hard work and greed. ... how extraordinary were the opportunities,
  how remote from the nineteenth century the static hierarchical ideal
  of the past!

  The massive contempt of the 'civilized' for the 'barbarians' (who 
  included the bulk of the laboring poor at home) rested on this feeling
  of demonstrated superiority.  The middle-class world was freely open to 
  all.  Those who failed to enter its gates therefore demonstrated a lack
  of personal intelligence, moral force or energy which automatically
  condemned them; or at best a historical or racial heritage which must
  permanently cripple them, or else they would have already made use of
  their opportunities.  The period which culiminated about the middle of 
  the century was therefore one of unexampled callousness, not merely 
  because the poverty which surrounded middle class respectability was
  so shocking that the native rich learned not to see it ... but because
  the poor, like the outer barbarians, were talked of as if they were
  not properly human at all. ..."
    
  Chapter 13, *Ideology: Secular*, p. 234 - 245:

  "Here we shall concentrate on ... the nature of society and the way it
  was going or ought to go. ... On this question there were two major
  divisions of opinion: ... those who believed in progress and the others.
  (The first group believed in) the triumphant, rationalist, humanist
  'Enlightenment' of the eighteenth century.  Its champions believed
  firmly (and correctly) that human history was an ascent ... On these
  points bourgeois liberals and revolutionary proletarian socialists were
  at one.
  
  ... It was a narrow, lucid, and sharp-edged philosophy ... It was rigorously
  rationalist and secular ... convinced of the ability of men in principle to
  understand all and solve all questions by the use of reason ...

  In brief, for classical liberalism, the human world consisted of 
  self-contained individual atoms with certain built-in passions and drives,
  each seeking above all to maximize his satisfactions and minimize his
  dissatisfactions, equal in this to all others, and 'naturally' recognizing
  no limits or rights of interference with his urges. ... In the course
  of pursuing this self-interest, each individual in this anarchy of equal
  competitors, found it advantageous or unavoidable to enter into certain
  relations with other individuals, and this complex of useful relationships
  ... constituted society and social or political groups. ... Social aims
  were therefore the arithmetical sum of individual aims.  Happiness ... was
  each individual's supreme object; the greatest happiness of the greatest
  number, was plainly the aim of society.

  In fact, pure *utilitarianism*, which franky reduced *all* human relations
  entirely to the pattern just sketched, was confined to very tactless 
  philosophers like the great Thomas Hobbes in the seventeenth century or 
  very confident champions of the middle class like ... Jeremy Bentham 
  (1748-1832), James Mill (1773-1836), and above all the classic political
  economists. ... Benthamites themselves championed bureaucratic state 
  management when they thought it secured the greatest happiness of the
  greatest number ... Consequently those seeking to safeguard private 
  property, enterprise and individual freedom often preferred to give it
  the metphysical sanction of a 'natural right' rather than the vulnerable
  one of 'utility'.  Moreover, a philosophy which so completely eliminated
  morality and duty by reducing them to rational calculation, might well
  weaken that sense of the eternal fitness of things among the ignorant 
  poor on which social stability rested.

  Utilitarianism, for reasons such as these, therefore never monopolized
  middle class liberal ideology.  It provided the sharpest radical axes
  with which to chop down traditional institutions ... But it was strong
  enough neither to inspire a revolution nor to safeguard against one ...

  In its political thought classical liberalism thus swerved from the
  daring and rigour which made it so powerful a revolutionary force. In
  its economic thought, however, it was less inhibited. ... Consequently
  classical political economy forms the most impressive intellectual
  monument to liberal ideology.  ... The publication of Adam Smith's
  (1723-90) *Wealth of Nations* in 1776 marks its beginning, that of David
  Ricardo's *Principles of Political Economy* in 1817 its peak ...

  The social argument of Adam Smith's political economy was both elegant
  and comforting.  It is true that humanity consisted essentially of 
  sovereign individuals ... pursuing their self-interest in competition
  with one another.   But it could be shown that these activities ...
  produced ... the most rapid possible increase in 'the wealth of nations',
  i.e. the comfort and wellbeing, and therefore the happiness, of all men.
  The basis of this natural order was the social division of labour.  It 
  could be scientifically *proved* that the existence of a class of 
  capitalists owning the means of production benefited all, including the
  class of labourers ... Morever, the economically very unequal society which
  resulted inevitably from the operations of human nature, was not 
  incompatible with the natural equality of all men or with justice. ...

  The power of this Panglossian view ... began to falter ... because the
  actual economic and social results of capitalism proved to be less 
  happy than forecast. ... Naturally it might still be held that the misery 
  of the poor who were condemned to linger on the verge of starvation ...
  still constituted the greatest happiness of the greatest number, which 
  merely happened to be much less than one might have hoped.  But such 
  facts ... damped optimism and stimulated critical enquiry, especially 
  into *distribution* as against *production*, which had chiefly preoccupied
  the generation of Smith.

  In politics ... the liberal ideology was neither as coherent nor as
  consistent.  ... For if the government really were popular, and the
  majority really ruled (i.e. if minority interests were sacrificed to it
  ...) could the actual majority -- 'the most numerous and poorest
  classes' -- be  relied upon to safeguard freedom and to carry out ...
  the programme of middle class liberals?

  The social discontents, revolutionary movements and socialist ideologies
  of the post-Napoleonic period intensified the dilemma ... Liberalism and
  democracy appeared to be adversaries rather than allies; the triple slogan
  of the French Revolution, liberty, equality, fraternity to express a 
  contradiction rather than a combination. ...

  While the liberal ideology thus lost its original confident swoop ...
  a new ideology, socialism, reformulated the old eighteenth century 
  verities ... the very arguments of classical liberalism were turned
  against the capitalist society which they had helped to build. ...
  nothing was easier than to observe that the greatest happiness for the
  greatest number, which was clearly not begin achieved, was that of the
  labouring poor. ... 

  More to the point, classical political economy in its Ricardian form
  could be turned against capitalism. ... If, as  political economy
  argued, labour was the source of all value, then why did the bulk of its
  producers live on the edge of destitution?  Because, as Ricardo showed
  ... the capitalist appropriated in the form of profit the surplus which
  the worker produced over and above what he received  in wages.  In fact,
  the capitalist exploited the worker.   It only  remained to do without
  capitalists and thus abolish exploitation. ...

  So far the new socialists merely made their case by pushing the arguments
  of classical Franco-British liberalism beyond the point where bourgeois
  liberals were prepared to go. ... What distinguishes the various members
  of the ideological family descended from humanism and the Enlightenment,
  liberal, socialist, communist or anarchist, is not the gentle anarchy
  which is the utopia of all of them, but the methods of achieving it.
  At this point, however, socialism parted company with the classical
  liberal tradition.

  In the first place it broke radically with the liberal assumption that 
  society was a mere aggregate or combination of individual atoms, and that
  their motive force was their self-interest and competition.  In doing so
  the socialists returned to the oldest of all human ideological traditions,
  the belief that man is naturally a communal being.  Men naturally live
  together and help one another.  Society was not a necessary but regrettable
  diminution of man's unlimited natural right to do as he liked, but the 
  setting of his life, happiness and individuality.  The Smithian idea that
  the exchange of equivalents in the market somehow assured social justice,
  struck them as either incomprehensible or immoral.  The bulk of the common
  people held this view even when they could not express it. ...

  In the second place socialism adopted a form of argument which, if not
  outside the range of the classical liberal tradition, had not been greatly
  stressed within it; the evolutionary and historical.  ... There was an 
  element of historic evolution in the classical rationalist case for the 
  good society; for an ideology of progress implies one of evolution ...
  But it was not until Karl Marx (1818-83) transferred the centre of gravity
  of the argument for socialism from its rationality or desirablity to its
  historic inevitability that socialism acquired its most formidable 
  intellectual weapon ...

  For Marx human society had inevitably broken primitive communism into
  classes; inevitably evolved through a succession of class societies,
  each in spite of its injustices in its time 'progressive', each 
  containing the 'internal contradictions' which at a certain point made 
  it an obstacle to further progress and generating the forces for its
  supercession.  Capitalism was the last of these, and Marx, so far from
  merely attacking it, used all his world-shaking eloquence to trumpet forth
  its historic achievements.  But capitalism ... would plunge into a crisis
  from which it could not emerge.  Capitalism, moreover, .. inevitably created
  its own gravediggers, the proletariat whose numbers and discontent would
  grow while the concentration of economic power in fewer and fewer hands
  made it more vulnerable to overthrow.  Proletarian revolution must 
  therefore inevitably overthrow it. ..."

  For more excerpts from *The Age of Revolution*, see under 18 Nov 2020, below.

13 Jul 2021 (but it fits best here, after *The Age of Revolution*)

- Repression's Rewards by Bob Harris, review of *The Savage Storm: 
  Britain on the Brink in the Age of Napoleon* by David Andress in *TLS*,    
  May 17, 2013 p. 11 (no link):

  "Andress argues that, domestically in this period, Britain was a 
  starkly divided society, afflicted by growing and intermittently intense
  social, political and economic tensions. ... Only ruthless displays of
  military and legal repression by the authorities kept the lid on these 
  pressures, and kept the threat of revolution simply a threat. ...
  The Luddite disturbances of 1811-12 are discussed at some length ...
  highlighting, again, the ruthless side of the British ruling elite, 
  and its willingness to disregard its own language of freedom, if this
  stood in the way of stamping out any threat to its interests, imagined
  or real."

11 Jul 2021 (but it fits best here, after *The Age of Revolution* and
   *The Savage Storm*)

- *What is History?* by E. H. Carr (1961), from Ch 3 *History, Science, 
  and Morality*, p. 80 -- 81 (no link):

  "Let us take the story of the industrialization of Great Britain
  between, say, about 1780 and 1870.  Virtually every historian will treat
  the  industrial revolution, probably without discussion, as a great and
  progressive achievement.  He will also describe the driving of the
  peasantry off the land, the herding of workers into unhealthy factories
  and unsanitary dwellings, the exploitation of child labor.  He will
  probably say that abuses occurred in the working of the system, and that
  some employers were more ruthless than others, and will dwell with some
  unction on the gradual growth of a humanitarian conscience once the
  system had become established.  But he will assume, again probably
  without saying it, that measures of coercian and exploitation, at any
  rate in the first stages, were an unavoidable part of the cost of
  industrialization. Nor have I ever heard of a historian who said that,
  in view of the cost, it would have been better to stay the hand of
  progress and not industrialize; if any such exists, he ... will -- quite
  properly -- not be taken  seriously by serious historians. ...

  Unfortunately it was not (the ones who suffered) who have survived
  to enjoy whatever glory or profit may have accrued ...  Those who pay the
  cost are rarely those who reap the benefits. ...

  We are born into society, we are born into history.  No moment occurs
  when we are offered a ticket of admission with the option to accept or
  reject it. The historian has no more conclusive answer than the
  theologian to the  problem of suffering.  He, too, falls back on the
  thesis of the lesser  evil and the greater good."

  Chapter 2, *Society and the Individual*, p. 35 - 36, 43 - 44 and Chapter 3 
  *History, Science, and Morality*, p. 83 - 84 (no link):
  
  "We sometimes speak of history as a 'moving procession'.  The metaphor
  is fair enough, provided it does not tempt the historian to think of 
  himself as an eagle surveying the scene from a lonely crag, or a V.I.P.
  at the saluting base.  Nothing of the kind!  The historian is just another
  dim figure trudging along in another part of the procession. ... The 
  thought of historians, as of other human beings, is moulded by the 
  environment of the time and place. ...

  But the only point I wish to make at the moment is the impossibility of
  erecting an abstract and super-historical standard by which historical
  actions can be judged. ... whether that standard derives from some
  divine authority postulated by theologians, or from a static Reason or
  Nature postulated by the philosophers of the Enlightenment. ... (The
  error of doing that is not due to) defects in the standard itself. It is
  that the attempt to erect such a standard is unhistorical and
  contradicts the very essence of history.  It provides a dogmatic answer
  to questions which the historian is bound by his vocation incessantly to
  ask. ... Moreover, when we examine these supposedly absolute and extra-
  historical values, we find that they too are rooted to history. ... The
  beliefs which we hold and the standards of judgment which we set up are
  part of history, and are as much subject to historical investigation as
  any other aspect of human behavior. ..."

18 Dec 2020

- *Going To Extremes* by Joe McGinnis (1980), p. 222 (no link):

  "You know," John Seiberling said, "one man's freedom is the freedom to
  mess up another man's freedom.  And the only way you can protect and
  have a rational society is to put some rules down ..."

  John Seiberling, congressman from Ohio, in hearings in Anchorage on an
  Alaska wilderness preservation bill.

- *The Best Minds of My Generation: A Literary History of the Beats* by Allen
  Ginserg, edited by Bill Morgan.  Grove Press, NY. 2017. p. 245-246 (no link):

  "There are moments of intimacy between men and women and men and men,
  soul to soul.  ...  It is not well known and not much written about
  except in Whitman, but I think it is probably universal.

  It's a staple of the American character, but it isn't very often
  presented.  Whitman thought it was the salvation of the nation and that
  unless the nation were made up of comrades democracy couldn't work.  A
  bunch of macho competitors all hating each other, or indifferent to each
  other, or scared of each other emotionally, would leave no possibility
  of a cooperative, democratic, functioning political system.   Only with
  basic friendliness would it be possible for a nation to create a
  political world that was livable. ..."

- Lord of Misrule by Rory Stewart, review of *Boris Johnson: The Gambler*
  by Tom Bower in *TLS*, Nov 6 2020, p. 4-5 (no link):
     
  "(Bower) minimizes Johnson's misdemeanors -- not by omitting them, but rather
  by listing so many that they lose their power to shock. ... Bower concludes
  therefore, that those who criticize him -- as I am about to do -- are 
  narrow-minded, prudish, inadequate, or envious.

  Johnson is after all the most accomplished liar in public life --
  perhaps the best liar ever to serve as prime minister.  ...  This lack
  of moral conviction is not a secret.  Rather than fooling everyone, he
  has in a sense never fooled anyone.  Siblings, parents, teachers,
  bosses, subordinates, colleagues and friends have always seen through
  him. ...

  And the public are fully aware of this.  Nevertheless, millions voted for him
  to be prime minister -- some with great enthusiasm.  Is this because many
  assume that no politician could actually be diligent, competent or sincerely
  dedicated to public service?  And that if someone -- a Theresa May or Keir 
  Starmer, for examples -- claims to be one of these things, they must be 
  deceiving us?  Johnson believes so, and this frames his political approach.
  ... he explains, "(It is) all about understanding that basically people regard
  politicians as a bunch of shysters." ...

  Why is this so particularly appealing?  Is it that voters want him to confirm
  their distrust of all elites and high-minded stories?  Or to vaidate some
  conviction that there can be no true moral or political purpose, no sincere
  vision of self or country? ...

  Johnson may have a bust of Pericles on his desk.  But he is not, as he pretends,
  a man suffering from akrasia -- someone who struggles, with shame, to live up
  to the ideals of a complex classical civilization.  Rather, he is an amoral
  figure operating in a much bleaker and coarser culture.  And it is in his
  interest -- and that of other similar politicians around the world -- to 
  make that culture ever coarser. ..."

28 Nov 2020

- *Let's Talk About Love: A Journey to the End of Taste* by Carl Wilson
  (2007), p. 122, 123 (no link):

  "For a century or more, sentimentality has been the cardinal aesthetic
  sin. ... To be  sentimental is to be kitsch, phony, exaggerated,
  manipulative, self-indulgent, hypocritical, cheap and cliched. ...  As
  kitsch, (sentimentality) is likened to Nazi or Stalinist propaganda by
  (many prominent critics).  The German novelist Hermann Broch (1886-1951,
  refugee from the Nazis) wrote,

  - "The producer of kitsch does not produce 'bad' art ... It is quite
    impossible to assess him according to aesthetic criteria; rather he should
    be judged as an ethically base being, a malefactor who profoundly 
    desires evil."

  "Is the problem that kitsch sentimentality ... takes everyday
  hopes and affections and inflates them into life-or-death melodramas? 
  Consider Zen scholar R. H. Blyth's elegant definition,
  
  - "We are being sentimental when we give to a thing more tenderness than
    God gives to it."

  ... If I believed in God, I might imagine this is what He created humans
  for, to give things more tenderness than He granted them, amid nature's
  unblinking harshness and the cruelty of fate ..."

22 Nov 2020

- Oh Brother: An Interview with David Eggers by Kevin Sampsell in 
  *The Stranger* (Seattle alt weekly), Feb 17 2000, p. 29 - 31 (no link):

  "Hatred of writers: odd concept. ... What makes us so angry towards these
  people?  Completing books is so arduous and bewildering and near-impossible 
  that I have to say that when you complete a book yourself, your respect for
  anyone who has also reached the end of the mine-riddled trek increases 
  exponentially.
 
  There was a time, at *Might* (Eggers' magazine) when we hated a lot of 
  people, and scorned this writer and that actor and those bands because 
  the products of their labors didn't appeal to us.  But the problem wasn't
  so much that these people were incredible frauds, or evil-born, or
  deserved to be run out of their chosen media, but that we, the critics,
  were bitter. ... But really, in the end, anger towards any creator or product
  of creativity says a good deal more about the angry person than it does
  about the creator of the work, or the work itself.

  Did Ethan Hawke (the movie actor), for example, write a good book when 
  he wrote *The Hottest State*?  He did.  First of all, he did write it,
  and he did complete it, and it makes sense, and has a beginning and a
  middle and an end.  All impressive feats.  And it was his first book.
  Surely we have the right not to like the book, but only the dark-hearted
  or confused will dismiss it out of hand, or resent him for doing it."

20 Nov 2020

- A Reader Responds to Workshops from Hell by Belle Randall in *Wordscape*
  (short-lived Seattle literary magazine) October 1999, p. 6 (no link):

  "Regarding ... a UW class in which a student reading aloud a Grace Paley
  poem was overcome with tears only to meet with David Wagoner's "Grace 
  Paley wasn't a very good poet" -- the story is told as if Wagoner's error
  was self-evident.  ... The students remain firm in the conviction that 
  raw emotion is the stuff of poetry -- or at least the stuff that poetry
  is trying to get *at*; it is privileged even *above* poetry in their minds
  and deserves to be treated with more compassion than this.

  But *isn't* there something bullying in claiming to be too moved by a
  poem to tolerate criticism?  ... To treat her as if she were an
  overwrought girl who must be allowed her misconceptions ... would be
  *less* respectful than to continue to give her an accurate report in
  matters of poetry, which is what Wagoner does.  This is his job.

  (This incident) demonstrates the clarity with which Wagoner sees badness in
  poetry as an observable fact, like the poem's shape on the page, whereas
  the students, confused on this point, consider it to be subjective."

- Tones of Day by Philip French, review of *Film and Attraction* by Andre
  Guadreault and two other books in *TLS*, Nov 25 2011, p. 22-23 (no link).
  This from another critic, Roger Odin, quoted in Gaudreault's book:

  "... teaching cinema has come to mean shaping students' tastes.  ...
  But universities and criticism are two different things.  If critics want
  to try to get people to share their tastes, fine.  But teaching taste
  at university?  ... We can accept that university professors place 
  themselves above students in terms of skills, but in terms of taste?
  By what right?"

- Untitled review by Simon Coppick of *No Particular Place To Go* by Hugo
  Williams in *TLS*, Oct 18 2002, In Brief page (no link):

  "Asked at one reading if he considers himself a craftsman, Williams
  replies that writing a poem is "more like gambling than carpentry.
  You keep thinking you're just about to hit on the winning system,
  the right system of mistakes." ..."
  
19 Nov 2020

- https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=25093230 - 
  What is your best native song that is unknown due to language barrier?

  "Sometimes I wished more people could know some of my amazing childhood
  songs which are unknown due to the language they are sang at and the
  country in which they became popular. I wonder are there songs like that
  in your country. Here are some of my personal favorites: ...
  (three links to recordings on YouTube)"

  Then follow 45 responses about many different languages, most with
  several more links.

- I'm Glad You Asked That Question by Lindsay Duguid, review of
  *Dialogues* by Naim Attallah in *TLS*, Dec 8 2000, p. 31 (no link):

  "... Only a few of the sixteen people interviewed make any
  conversational effort or try to be sharp or amusing ... there is little
  sense of personality or of an actual life lived and relished ...

  Reading the whole book has a depressing effect.  Very soon you realize
  that it is possible to be well educated, well connected, articulate, 
  distinguished, to have led an interesting life, and still be a bore."

18 Nov 2020, also 22 Dec 2020

- Making A Figure by Daniel Hitchens, review of three books about Edmund
  Burke in *TLS*, May 24 2013, p. 7 (no link):

  "... (Burke's) masterpiece *Reflections on the Revolution in France*
  (1790), has been celebrated for its somber premonitions of the decade
  after the fall of the Bastille. ... Burke predicted executions, social
  chaos, terrifying inhumanity, and the eventual rise of a figure who sounds
  remarkably like Napoleon.

  To a social conservative, the lesson is clear: Burke has percieved that if
  you sweep away existing hierarchies, ignore custom and ceremony, despise
  orthodox religion, and show no respect for the traditions you have received,
  then you will leave nothing but the will to power, which all these things 
  were meant to mediate, and which can now only be reined in by despotism.

  One standard response is: but what if the revolution degenerated not 
  thanks to some inner logic of violence, but because of massive political
  and military hostility from the rest of Europe?  And what if that hostility
  was whipped up in no small part by the author of the internationally 
  bestselling *Reflections on the Revolution in France*?  You do not need
  to take sides to see what a tangled issue it soon becomes."

- *The Age of Revolution 1789 - 1848* by Eric Hobsbawm (1962), p. 91-92,
  268 (no link):

  "It was now known that revolution in a single country could be a
  European phenomenon; that its doctrines could spread across frontiers,
  and, what was worse, its crusading armies could blow away the political
  systems of a  continent.  It was now known that social revolution was
  possible; that nations existed as something independent of states,
  peoples as something independent of their rulers, and even that the poor
  existed as something independent of the ruling classes. The French
  Revolution ... was a universal event.  No country was immune from it.
  ... as the governments knew, and as the peoples themselves were soon to
  know also. A Greek bandit and patriot expressed their feelings
  completely:

  - 'According to my judgment', said Kolokotrones, 'the French Revolution and the
    doings of Napoleon opened the eyes of the world.  The nations knew nothing
    before, and the people thought that kings were gods upon the earth and that
    they were bound to say that whatever they did was well done.  Through the 
    present change it is more difficult to rule the people.'

  "By the later years of the Napoleonic wars new generations of young men began
  to grow up for whom the great liberating flame of the Revolution was visible
  across the years, the ashes of its excesses and corruptions having dropped out
  of sight ... And as Europe advanced year by year more deeply into the low
  featureless plains of reaction, censorship and mediocrity and the pestilential
  swamps of poverty, unhappiness and oppression, the image of the revolution 
  became ever more luminous."

- Backwards Into The Future by David Hawkes, review of *The Silence of Animals:
  On Progress and Other Modern Myths* by John Gray in *TLS*, Aug 30 2013, p. 7
  (no link):

  "*The Silence of Animals* continues (Gray's) extended critique of
  "meliorism": the belief that the moral and material condition of
  humanity will improve over time ...  Gray notes that this myth is far
  more fundamental,  consistent, and tenacious than its seminal
  manifestation in the salvation and apocalyptic myths of Christianity.
  In the guises of Enlightenment rationalism, Romantic individualism,
  liberal humanism, nationalism, Marxism and neo-liberal capitalism, the
  spectre of progress continues to haunt an ostensibly secularized
  humanity ...

  To lose faith in progress is to lose the ability to see meaning in life.
  It is to abandon the notion, central to rationalism and religion alike,
  that empirical appearances conceal substantial essences. ... It assumes
  ... that signs do not refer to an external reality, but create their own
  referents.  To lose faith in progress is to view the world as a
  depthless simulacrum with no  underlying significance.

  ... If we no longer see essence beneath appearance, referent behind sign,
  or subject behind object, that must reflect a development in human history,
  not the discovery on an eternal verity about the world.  The world can only 
  have meaning conferred upon it, or be deprived of it, by human beings.

  There is surely no great difficulty in tracing the power of symbols to
  its source today, when the spiraling abstractions of finance bestow
  uprecedented practical power on ... signs.  Gray never considers that it
  may be the performative power of ... fictional financial figures, that has
  stopped people from perceiving meaning behind the signs of history.  He
  has little to say about the influence of money on the mind, which is an
  eloquent  absence from any twenty-first century philosophy with
  aspirations to social relevance.
 
  ... History happens, and change takes place, whether or not we choose to 
  give it meaning.  ... If the Western intelligentsia no longer acknowledges
  any significance to life, that does not mean that we have discovered a 
  timeless truth that had been hidden from Aristotle, Plato, and the 
  prophets of monotheism.  It means that we can no longer see meaning where
  others once did."


- Texts For Our Times by David Hawkes, review of *Fiction Sets You Free:
  Literature, Liberty, and Western Culture* by Russell A. Berman in *TLS*
  Oct 24 2008, p 24-25 (no link):

  "It is paradoxical for an advocate of the Western cultural tradition 
  to laud market capitalism. ... There have been many societies in which
  large numbers of people dedicated their lives to the pursuit of economic
  self-interest through the market.   But there have been no societies in 
  which the pursuit of economic self-interest through the market was held to
  be an admirable way to spend one's life.  Our society is unique in having
  produced that philosophy.  One of the reasons to read the literature of the
  past is to learn how anomalous our society is in its self-interested 
  single-mindedness. ..."

17 Nov 2020

- Presence in the Past by Michael Bentley, review of *History Man: The Life of
  R. G. Collingwood* in *TLS* Sep 25 2009, p. 18 (no link):

  "The stories of thinkers are normally short because they tend not to do 
  very much.  R. G. Collingwood's is soon told, at one level. ...

  That is one, "public", story.  But Inglis wants to place alongside it a 
  second that illuminates the private person, and also supplies what he
  considers a key to the life of the mind ... in which philosophy, art,
  and mind commingled.  No matter how "technical" or "abstract" the thought
  might become in Collingwood's philosophical writing, it has its basis for
  Inglis in a longing to communicate a connected vision.

  However, because Collingwood was a philosopher and because Inglis isn't, 
  there are bound to be problems at those points where technical philosophical
  knowledge, and an understanding of its apparatus criticus, are necessary for
  clear exposition.

  The feeling recurs that Inglis, elsewhere a tough-minded man, does not
  get going when the going gets tough.  Rather, he reassures the reader
  that the tough parts of the texts are needlessly technical, too abstract
  by half. ... But wherever they sail, whomever they love and be they
  surrounded by never so many bees, what philosophers do is philosophize
  and when writing about them one has to analyze the philosophy.  What
  Inglis does at critical moments is to uncomplicate it when the
  complication is, to use an Inglis word,  constitutive. ..."

- What Philosophers Should Do, review by Edouard Machery of two philosophy
  books by a single author in *TLS*, June 21 2013, p. 8 (no link):

  "Philosophy is not work, says (the author) in (the first book): it is
  intrinsically valuable, and it is a form of play.  Reading (the first book)
  and (even more so) (the second book) did not feel like playing at all.
  It felt more like work, in fact. ..."

- I'm Not Myself by Charlie Huenemann, review of *The Ego Trick: What Does It
  Mean To Be You?* by Julian Baggini in *TLS*, Oct 21 2011, p. 25 (no link):

  "There is no shortage of philosophers, from antiquity to today, arguing 
  for this view of the self as an illusion sponsored by a dynamic bundle of
  elements.  But Baggini's book is set apart by ... his interest in thinking
  through the practical consequences.  For it is one thing to say, "The self
  is an illusion", and quite another to confess, "I am an illusion". ..."  

13 Nov 2020

- https://sites.lsa.umich.edu/gordonkane/wp-content/uploads/sites/117/2014/07/THE-FUTURE-OF-THE-University.pdf - 
  The Future of The/Our Research University by Gordon Kane (1999):

  "Four centuries ago no aspect of the natural world was understood. Today
  we know that the natural universe is governed by a few very general laws
  of nature that we can understand, that lightning and earth-quakes are
  not punishment for our sins, that the sun will rise tomorrow whether we
  pray for it to rise or not, that inanimate objects and the stars are
  made of the same atoms we are, that the laws of nature are the same
  throughout the observed universe, that all we can see is made of just
  three elementary particles, that everything that happens in the natural
  world is a manifestation of one of the four forces (gravitational,
  electromagnetic, weak, and strong), that the universe began as a hot gas of
  particles about twelve billion years ago and has been expanding since,
  that all living things on earth share the same genetic building blocks,
  that life on earth began with simple self-replicating forms and evolved
  to the forms we see today, that diseases are caused by bacteria,
  viruses, and breakdown of genes, that most life on earth occurs in
  complicated ecosystems, that our landscape and mountains and oceans and
  climate are steadily changing and have been for billions of years.

  All these things we know have been learned using the method of science,
  which is basically the effort to understand the natural world by making
  informed guesses about how it works, and then testing these guesses by
  observation and experiment, discarding what does not work. 

  All students should have a course in which they learn how science has
  helped us understand the natural world and led us to the above knowledge
  (and much more) ...  They need to know those things because many want
  to, because every educated person should, because to be effective
  citizens in the modern world an understanding of how science works and
  the knowledge resulting from doing science are very helpful, and because
  possessing scientific literacy is important for many people for their
  careers ... Most important, all students should understand these things
  because learning them has been one of the great achievements of humans."

- https://www.theparisreview.org/interviews/3605/the-art-of-fiction-no-64-kurt-vonnegut -
  Kurt Vonnegut, The Art of Fiction No. 64 in *The Paris Review* issue 69, 
  Spring 1977:

  *Vonnegut*: ... All the great story lines are great practical jokes that
  people fall for over and over again.

  *Interviewer*: Can you give an example?

  *Vonnegut*: The Gothic novel. Dozens of the things are published every
  year, and they all sell. My friend Borden Deal recently wrote a Gothic
  novel for the fun of it, and I asked him what the plot was, and he said,
  A young woman takes a job in an old house and gets the pants scared off
  her.

  *Interviewer*: Some more examples?

  *Vonnegut*: The others aren't that much fun to describe: somebody gets
  into trouble, and then gets out again; somebody loses something and gets
  it back; somebody is wronged and gets revenge; Cinderella; somebody hits
  the skids and just goes down, down, down; people fall in love with each
  other, and a lot of other people get in the way; a virtuous person is
  falsely accused of sin; a sinful person is believed to be virtuous; a
  person faces a challenge bravely, and succeeds or fails; a person lies,
  a person steals, a person kills, a person commits fornication.

  *Interviewer*: If you will pardon my saying so, these are very old-
  fashioned plots.

  *Vonnegut*: I guarantee you that no modern story scheme, even
  plotlessness, will give a reader genuine satisfaction, unless one of
  those old-fashioned plots is smuggled in somewhere. I don't praise plots
  as accurate representations of life, but as ways to keep readers
  reading.

  When I used to teach creative writing, I would tell the students to make
  their characters want something right away -- even if it's only a glass
  of water. Characters paralyzed by the meaninglessness of modern life
  still have to drink water from time to time. ... When you exclude plot,
  when you exclude anyone's wanting anything, you exclude the reader, which
  is a mean-spirited thing to do. ... And you can put him to sleep by
  never having characters confront each other. ... It's the writers job to
  stage confrontations, so the characters will say surprising and
  revealing things, and educate and entertain us all. If a writer can't or
  won't do that, he should withdraw from the trade."

12 Nov 2020

- On Receiving the National Book Award for *JR* (1975) by William Gaddis,
  in *The Rush for Second Place: Essays and Occasional Writings* (2002),
  p. 122 (no link):

  "... I feel like part of the vanishing breed that thinks a writer should
  be read and not heard, let alone seen.  I think that this is because
  there seems so often today to be a tendency to put the person in the
  place of his or her work, to turn the creative artist into a performing
  one, to find what a writer says about writing somehow more valid, or
  more real, than the writing itself.

  ... it seems to me the only way to keep writers writing well, or trying 
  to write well, is to read what we write."
  
 9 Nov 2020

- *As Of This Writing: Essential Essays 1968 - 2002* by Clive James (2003),
  pages 95, 100 (no link):

  "(This poet) proved, like the visitor to Brigadoon who wished the village
  into existence on a day it was not scheduled to appear, that if you want
  something deeply enough anything is possible.  What he wanted to be was
  a great artist, and by the end of his career there were one or two really
  great artists (certainly Auden) who were willing to concede that (he) was
  of their company.   

  But just as often as they are right in such judgments, real artists are
  wrong.  Like anybody else, they tend to admire sincerity, dedication, 
  industry, openness, intellectual generosity, a sense of fun -- and like
  anybody else they have trouble, once they know him, in getting the man
  who possesses these attributes separated from his work.  Which is as
  far as I want to pontificate along this particular line, except to say
  that it seems probable that in (his) case the general critical view has
  followed the lead of his fellow poets, who simply liked him  ... 

  ... what is now needed is some healthy skepticism, even at the cost of
  seeming harsh. ... here a sharp nose ought to smell pastiche. A straight
  read through (his) *Collected Poems* should convince even the moderately
  informed reader that (his) incipient individualism was  successively
  broken down by a series of strong influences ... Estimations of (his)
  poetry which do not confront this problem can't really be of  much use,
  since the question of originality, if it arises at all, can  never be
  peripheral: orginality is more than a requirement of good poetry, it is
  a description of it. ...

  ... (He) waited a long time to be accepted as a poet, and when he had been
  could never accept that it had happened: he was always waiting for the
  final reassurance -- a common trait in people uncertain of their work.
  No amount of Pulitzers, or even Nobels, can satisfy a need like that."
  -- *TLS, 1972*

  *Postscript, 1992*:  "... these two pieces now look like a single dance
  on a lonely grave.  Certainly the vocabulary was too harsh ...  and just
  because he was dead was of course no good reason for speaking as if he
  couldn't hear.  ...  If poetry and and the criticism of it had agreed
  standards there would be less bitchery. ..."
  
 8 Nov 2020

- A Joke Too Far by Colin Burrow, review of *Sir John Harrington and the
  Book as Gift* by Jason Scott-Warren, in *TLS* 22 Aug 2002, p. 10 - 11
  (no link):

  "... It is not clear why anyone whose prime aim in life is to get on
  should ever make jokes; too ofen they misfire.  True, the best jokes
  require a judgment about who they are intended for, and so call on a 
  politic canniness, but the chief characteristic of a really good joke
  is that having made this judgment you then go a little beyond what you
  know your audience expects.  

  ... But if Harrington was so sensitive to privy meanings, why did his
  public career fail to take off? ... If Harrington's works were so
  carefully placed and were intended to advance their author, why did he
  never land a juicy job?

  The traditional explanation for this would be that Harrington just could
  not resist a joke, and with a post-theoretical tweak or two I think this
  remains the best explanation.  Harrington's jokes try to build up a 
  persona of a man who could speak frankly, a 'plaine fellow' (as Harrington
  describes himself) who could offer advice on how to clean up the privy 
  of Elizabethan politics with a blast of plain-speaking.  ... But his
  jokes go so far beyond anything his audience would have been comfortable
  hearing that one has to conclude he was exceptionally bad at judging
  the tone of voice required to get on, or that in his writing and conduct
  the need to get on was regularly overshadowed by a suplus of almost
  uncontrollable mockery.

  Harrington's humour never seems to have done him any good. ... while
  Harrington may have tried to fashion a career for himself through the 
  giving of books and manuscripts, he was also a man who could not stop himself
  from teasing people even if it was not in his interests.  This is one of 
  his most admirable features, and it is of a piece with what is good in the
  things that we wrote.  But he would always press a joke too far.

  The reason Harrington has struck so many biographers as a real person 
  one can identify with is ... he was a person (who like all real people
  had both a sense of humor and a dog) whose desire for a joke at any cost
  made him repeatedly break out from, and sometimes make a catastrophic mess 
  of, his desire to charge his works with worldly purposes.

  And that's why ... I would still rather spend an evening with Sir John
  Harington than with any other Elizabethan.  He was someone who would never
  quite do what was expected of him, which is why he wrote poems about dogs
  and mothers-in-law and composed Rabelasian prose fantasies about water closets
  rather than ever getting a proper job.  Literature from this period is 
  chiefly a product of material failure, and is written by men (mostly) who
  failed to get on. ... writers whose works fail to achieve the worldly purposes
  they intended have a better chance of being fun to read now than the works
  by people who wrote simply to get what they wanted from the world."

- Signature on a post in the Usenet *sci.logic* newsgroup, Oct 1999:

  *It is better to suffer wrong than to do it, and happier to be 
  sometimes cheated than not to trust.*  -- Samuel Johnson

 5 Nov 2020

- *Uncommon People: The Rise and Fall of the Rock Stars*, David
  Hepworth (2017), pages 6, 2, 8 (no link):

  Now, like the cowboy, the cavalier, the wandering minstrel, the
  chorus girl, the burglar in the striped sweater, the top-hatted banker,
  the painter with his beret, and the writer in his smoking jacket,  the
  rock star must finally be consigned to the wardrobe of anachronistic
  stereotypes. ... His power has been destroyed by the disappearance  of
  the record industry, his magic fleeting before the twenty-four hour
  daylight of social media.

  Rock stars were the product of an age when music was hard to access
  and was treasured accordingly.  ... Their products now compete on a
  level playing field with everything from virtual reality games to
  streaming movies.  What was once hard to find is now impossible to
  escape.  Music no longer belongs to a category of otherness.  It is now
  just another branch of the distraction business ...

  Rock stars were uncommon people.  They came from the masses and got to
  the top without the help of education, training, family ties, money, or
  other conventional ladders.  They came from ordinary lives and had no
  reason to expect that they would ever be special. At the same time they
  refused to accept that they would ever be anything but exceptional.
  Most surprising of all, a lot of them had careers that lasted far longer
  than they had any right to expect, because long after the hits stopped
  coming their legends continued to endure."

  Other excerpts from *Uncommon People* appear at 6 Oct 2018, below.

 4 Nov 2020

- *Revolution in the Head: The Beatles' Records and the Sixties* 
  by Ian MacDonald, third edition (1994, 1997, 2005), pages 297-298, 
  385 - 391, 1 (no link):

  "The 'heavy metal' idiom of the Seventies originated in the mid-Sixties
  switch from the low-volume standard pop four-piece to the vastly
  amplified rock 'power trio' ... Yet the loss of the craft of the rhythm
  guitarist was soon felt in a degradation of texture and a decline in
  overall musical subtlety. Rhythm guitarists were usually songwriters,
  and the variety of  articulation and accenting techniques they used also
  shaped their compositions. The average power trio, lacking such a
  musical brain, was in effect an  excuse to replace songs with riffs and
  discard nuance for noise. ...

  The Beatles' interest in musical developments around them was keen and
  usually productive, but their attempts at emulating the heavy style were
  without exception embarrassing.  The quintessential Sixties four-piece,
  their natural inclinations were for balance, form, and attention to detail,
  and in straining to transcend these obsolete values in *Helter Skelter*
  they comically overreached themselves, reproducing the requisite bulldozer
  design but on a Dinky Toy scale. ..."

  "The following pages provide ... a monthly selection of records popular
  in the UK between 1960 and 1970. ... In whatever genre and of whatever
  artistic standard, the singles of the Sixties were as a rule more
  memorable, inventive, and affecting than those of today.  Why this is so
  would take longer to  cover than can be afforded here, yet one or two
  simple points are worth making.

  In the sixties, music was generally recorded live, its arrangements blocked
  out in advance.  This method necessarily combined real urgency, a high level
  of empathic expertise from the players, and great ingenuity on the part of 
  producers ... Modern records, rather than embodying a *performance*, are 
  usually built up as they go along by using a layering principle ...  The 
  result of all this has been the gradual replacement of expressive skills
  by technical ones -- the decline of subtlety in songwriting and instrumental
  finesse mirrored by a monstrous efflorescence of boffin expertise in sound
  manufacture and studio-craft.

  ... At its simplest this means that songs are now written from the rhythm
  track upwards, rather than from a melodic/harmonic idea, as was the case with
  almost all Sixties music ... Within such an ethos, melody is as likely to
  flourish as a rose in concrete, whilst sensitivity to harmonic nuance 
  inevitably withers. ...  What is less obvious is that the absence of 
  rhythmic mechanization in Sixties music released the natural effervescence
  of the ensemble studio performance, as the subtle acceleration in tracks
  like *I Want To Tell You* and *Fixing a Hole* demonstrates.
  
  The differences between Sixties pop and what came after it are epitomized
  by the loss of one vital element: the unexpected. ... the lack of 
  melodic/harmonic surprise in Nineties music is numbing. ...  By contrast,
  when Sixties listeners heard a new Beatles song -- or good ones by 
  Holland-Dozier-Holland, Jagger-Richard, Brian Wilson, Ray Davies, 
  Bacharach-David, Syd Barret, Smokey Robinson, Pete Townshend, etc., etc. --
  they never knew from bar to bar what was coming next.  Sometimes this was
  because these songwriters were musically aware enough to make unusual 
  moves on purpose, but mostly it reflected the quintessential quality
  of the sixties: self-determined openness. ... Originality in pop culture
  then became -- for a while -- uniquely prized, creative unexpectedness
  stemming almost as much from attitude as from talent ...

  There is a great deal more to be said about the catastrophic decline 
  of pop (and rock criticism) -- but not here.  All that matters is that,
  when examining the following Chronology of Sixties pop, readers are aware
  that they are looking at something on a higher scale of achievement than
  today's -- music which no contemporary artist can claim to match in feeling,
  variety, formal invention, and sheer out-of-the-blue inspiration.  That
  the same can be said of other musical forms -- most obviously classical 
  and jazz -- confirms that something in the soul of Western culture began
  to die in the late Sixties.  Arguably pop music, as measured by the singles
  charts, peaked in 1966, thereafter beginning a shallow decline in overall
  quality which was already steepening by 1970.   While some may date this
  tail-off to a little later, only the soulless or tone-deaf will refuse to
  admit any decline at all.  Those with ears to hear, let them hear."
  
  *If you want to know about the Sixties, play the music of the Beatles.*
  -- Aaron Copland

 3 Nov 2020

- In Draft Form by Allen Shawn, review of *The Selected Correspondence
  of Aaron Copland* in *TLS*, Nov 10 2006, p. 8 (no link):

  "... After his initial composition lessons with Rubin Goldmark as a teenager,
  Copland left Brooklyn and sought European training. ... There he discovered
  a charismatic young teacher with whom he bonded, someone who, as he later
  wrote to his parents, "understands the kind of modern music I like to write".
  "Now be prepared for a surprise", his letter continues, "My teacher is not
  -- as you suppose -- a man -- but a woman."

  Copland's studies with Nadia Boulanger continued for the following three
  years ... Boulanger helped him learn and absorb the "Western" tradition,
  while also drawing out of him his first ambitious works in a new kind of
  idiom: long-lined, transparent, unencumbered; a bracing music of
  gleaming modernity, directness, power, and character, unashamed to
  declare its Americanness or to make use of native jazz or folk sources.
  Copland returned from Europe not only more trained, but also more
  American than when he left. ...

  Copland's music smells of outdoors.  ... It conveys an America of
  possibilities, but also an America whose openness can be bleak, rootless,
  and lonely.  His optimistic outlook was coupled to a kind of stoicism,
  and a distinctly American sense of isolation and solitude, akin to that
  found in Hopper's paintings and Frost's poetry.   While superficial aspects
  of Copland's more folksy side have been mimicked in a thousand film and
  television scores, the orginals have an inventiveness and precision
  -- a hardness, in fact -- that is inimitable. ... his music -- lean,
  stripped of all excess, finely focused -- retains its brilliant 
  effectiveness.  When sunny or lyrical, it radiates an honest, unsentimental
  warmth that is never gooey.

  ... If (Copland) pondered any of the ironies implicit in his story, he
  did so privately.  Among them are that a Jewish, Brooklyn-born homosexual,
  the son of Lithuanian immigrants, ... should -- in his ballet and film
  scores -- create the musical sound forever associated in the public mind
  with the American Midwest and with the American cowboy.

  ... Copland describes his meeting with his teacher Nadia Boulanger as
  the most important encounter of his life, and his letters to her show
  unswerving loyalty and gratitude, and deep personal connection ... while
  also maintaining a crucial degree of independence and distance from her. ...

  (In the letters to Leonard Bernstein) there is no mistaking the
  symbiotic bond ... in which the older Copland at first plays the role of
  playful and sensible mentor, but eventually becomes a grateful and
  admiring colleague. ... Bernstein later wrote of Copland's early
  compositional  advice as focused on stripping things down to a kind of
  radiant plainness, on teaching him to recognize freshness or its absence
  ("that  note is not fresh because you've just used it here"). ...

  ... excellent writer though he was, (Copland) revealed himself more in 
  his music and behavior than in his words.  The value of this "new"
  collection lies in the way it makes clear the private consistency of
  his nature and views, his imperviousness to corrupting influences, and
  the degree to which he was not deflected from his artistic aims by success.
  If there is a mystery in the degree to which the man was formed, once and
  for all, at such an early age -- already, it would appear, at the age of
  twenty sailing towards the future with a rare kind of artistic and personal
  fearlessness and optimism, a sense of adventure, a strength suggestive of
  self-knowledge -- it is not a mystery likely to be elucidated by Copland
  himself.

  Yet while these charming and circumspect letters do not dwell on intellectual
  matters and seldom betray any personal or artistic secrets, this is still
  a book that artists, in particular, should read.  It shows very movingly that
  it is possible to be committed to what one is doing while being generous
  to others and a citizen of the world; that is is not necessary to be 
  especially neurotic to be a great artist; that strong convictions need not
  preclude diplomatic civility; that it is possible to produce important work
  and remain unpretentious."

- Conversations on the Journey by Richard Sennett, review of *On Creativity*
  by John Tusa and *Parallels and Paradoxes* by Daniel Barenboim and Edward
  W. Said, in *TLS* June 20 2003, p. 36 (no link):

  "... What Tusa discovers in these interviews is the artists' worry about
  getting things right; "inspiration" is a word which arouses an ironic
  shrug. ... But for all Tusa's artists, the creative process stands for 
  the journey from subjective feeling to objective expression; art happens
  only when they arrive at that destination.

  ... both books reveal people obsessed with getting things right, with
  arriving at form.  In both books, working artists avoid equating
  creativity with errant subjectivity; even when contemplating the
  relation between  silence and sound -- a subject which preoccupies
  Barenboim -- the goal is a material result: the sound of a  particular
  crescendo, the length of a particular silence. ..."

30 Oct 2020

- *I Married a Communist* by Philip Roth (1998), p. 199 (no link):

  "And so the talk continued, an amiable, quiet conversation with a 
  little laughter ...  I couldn't remember ever having been so unagitated
  myself in Ira's company.  Nor had I ever seen him so serious about 
  something that wasn't world affairs or American politics or the failings
  of the human race. ...

  There was something so winning about those two men's good humored
  absorption in each other ... that I had to wonder afterward if this
  person who didn't  have to get all stirred up and go through all that
  Ira-ish emotion to have a conversation wasn't perhaps the real, if
  unseen, inactive Ira, and the other, the furious radical, an
  impersonation, an imitation of something ...

  The respect and fondness that Ira had for Horace Bixton suggested even to
  me, a boy, that there was a very simple world of simple people and simple
  satisfactions into which Ira might have drifted, where all his vibrating
  passions, where all that equipped him (and ill equipped him) for society's
  onslaught might have been remade and even pacified. 

  ... And then again, maybe not.  Maybe to be, like Horace, without a great
  enemy would have made life even more impossible for Ira than it already was."

- Bonfire Night at Powys Terrace by Rosemary Hill, review of *The Ossie Clark
  Diaries* in *TLS*, Dec 11 1998, p. 26 (no link):

  "Reading Ossie Clark's diaries is like staying sober through a long, terrible
  party.  At the beginning everyone's there -- David Hockney, Celia, Mick, 
  Bianca -- but most of them have gone home long before the end.  There are 
  some ugly scenes, and you finish up stuck in the kitchen with a maudlin 
  drunk who used to be somebody. ...

  If, as Henrietta Rous suggests in her introduction, something "decent and 
  humble" gradually emerges from all this, it is not Ossie.  It is the friends
  who offer him chance after chance, most of which he squanders and all of
  which he resents. ...

  One thing Ossie never lost was the capacity to take offence. ...
  By the end there is something impressive about this kind of grumbling,
  a kind of heroic tetchiness, which enables him, in the face of real disaster,
  to find fault with trivialities.  Reduced to Salvation Army handouts, 
  he complains about the "hidden fat" in the cheese pasties.

  ... In manipulating surfaces and pattern he was an artist, but fashion
  is an applied art and application was one of the many things 
  Ossie Clark lacked."

14 Oct 2020

- King of the Road by J. R. Moehringer, review of *Riding Toward Everywhere*
  by William T. Vollman in *The New York Times Book Review*, Jan 27 2008,
  p. 9 (no link):

  "I'd love to take William T. Vollman out for a beer.  I'd ask him about
  his adventures in Afghanistan, Bosnia, Iraq and Congo and at the 
  North Pole.  I'd ... tell him that for years I've been a fan of his
  journalism, novels, and essays.  Then, when the moment felt right, I'd 
  lean in, look Vollman square in the eye and say: *Pal, what the hell's 
  wrong with you?*

  ... At 47, despite a wife and young daughter, ... despite a staggering 
  talent and closet full of literary prizes, one of our finest writers gets
  his kicks breaking into rail yards and hopping frieght trains.  Why Amtrack,
  or Vollman's agent, or someone with a butterfly net, hasn't stopped him is
  one of the great mysteries of our time.

  Vollmann doesn't care where the trains go. ... He has no ticket, no credit
  card, and frankly no real purpose, which is ultimately the fatal flaw in
  'Riding Toward Everywhere', his earnest, diverting, and baffling new book
  about life on the rails.

  ... Vollmann is an avid student of squalor ... thus this book also features
  an ensemble of demented waysiders ... He encounters his anonymous inamorata
  near some tracks, "very high ... dancing alone by her campfire," an 
  umbrella poking out of her grocery cart -- what guy wouldn't be turned on?
  He kisses her, and kisses her some more.  The episode is so freaky, so
  out there, you later wonder if you actually read it or nodded off and 
  dreamed it. 

  Clearly Vollmann is writing from his heart.  He longs in earnest to get
  away from, or back to, America, and such longing lies at the core of our
  national literature.  But unlike the literary road warriors he reveres,
  Vollmann never manages to make his getaway sound urgent or fun. ... his
  material never rises to the level of his bravery or his genius.  With no
  purpose, no destination, no *story*, his epic journey to Everywhere becomes
  a round trip to nowhere ..."

29 Sep 2020

- Book review by Sheena Joughin in *TLS*, Oct 3, 2003, p. 30 (no link):

  "The memoirist's relationship to his or her central character is 
  inevitably more fraught than the novelist's.  (This author) seems not to 
  know what to make of herself, or what the purpose of her memoir is, 
  which is fatal to the emotional rhythm of her tale and the pace of the
  writing itself. ...

  (The author) knows a lot she doesn't tell us, or cannot allow herself
  to make explicit. ... (This) is a disingenuous book. ..."

28 Sep 2020

- The Firepower and the Glory by Roz Kaveny, review of *REAMDE* by Neal
  Stephenson in *TLS*, Oct 28 2011, p. 20 (no link):
  
  "As far as (Stephenson) is concerned, most problems can be resolved 
  by intelligence and pragmatism ... Most of the conflicts in the world
  can be ended by negotiation ... If there is a weakness to his position,
  it is that he does not accept imaginatively that a lot of intelligent
  people are selfish past the point of reason, and that the list of things
  on which some people will not negotiate is far more extensive than he
  believes. ..."

- Book review by Sheena Joughin in *TLS*, Aug 2, 2013, p. 21 (no link):

  "(This novel) is an exhausting book, with no shape, no development, 
  and very little plot.  ... the whole has a woozy touch-screen feel ...
  we begin to feel the numbed indifference that comes with a slideshow
  of a stranger's wedding. ..."

27 Sep 2020

- Out of Suburbia by Roz Kaveny, review of *The Inner Man: The Life of
  J. G. Ballard* by John Baxter in *TLS*, Nov 18, 2011, p. 5 (no link):

  "From a comparatively early stage in his career, Ballard had a clear
  and consistent view of how the world was and how he wanted us to see it.
  It was a Hobbesian view, in which gentleness is only a passive-aggressive
  strategy and to be selfish is simply to be human; it is a view in which
  things decline toward entropy ...

  One of the reasons why Ballard continued to be engaged with science
  fiction long after his career had become considerably more mainstream
  was that he wanted to show those American optimists who thought that the
  Space Age was an epoch of exploration that it had been a fad that was
  already over. 

  Where a number of earlier British SF writers -- John Wyndham, for example --
  had played around with catastrophe, they had done so largely in a mode
  that explored universal blindness and deadly ambulant vegetables as tests
  of character and morale.  Ballard's novels in this vein -- *The Drowned
  World* (1962), *The Crystal World* (1966) -- return to an older tradition
  that sees the destruction of civilization by nature as the righteous return
  of the repressed; his heroes do not retreat to places of safety in an
  unkind world, but rather strike on, into wilderness, despair, and death.

  The satiric strain in SF -- what his friend Brian W. Aldiss called its
  "comic infernos" -- was part of what drew Ballard to it.  The fragmentary
  "condensed novels" of *The Atrocity Exhibition* (1970) would have had a 
  problem finding their audience outside SF magazines whose readers were
  prepared to put up with a great deal of weirdness with only minimal 
  complaint. ...

  Ballard claimed in what was almost certainly an apocryphal story, 
  that (his novel) *Crash* (1973) had been shown to a publisher's 
  psychiatrist wife, who said that it indicated a derangement beyond help.
  Ballard, as a young man, had abandoned the study of psychiatry himself;
  that diagnosis of derangement beyond help might usefully be seen as his
  final judgment on the world in which he had to live, and which he rightly
  convinced, against the odds, that he was an important writer."
  
- His Twists and Turns, On Paper and in Life by Dwight Garner, review 
  of *Miracles of Life: An Autobiography* by J. G. Ballard in *The New
  York Times*, Feb 6, 2013, p. C6 (no link):

  "In the *New York Times Book Review*, D. Keith Mano didn't just review
  it (*Crash*); he reacted as if someone had thrown a severed head in his
  lap. ... Mr. Mano called the novel "the most repulsive book I've yet 
  to come across."  He couldn't help adding, "*Crash* is well written:
  credit given where due."

  It took the world time to catch up with Ballard (1930 -- 2009).  His
  name has been fashioned into a useful adjective.  To call something
  Ballardian is to suggest dystopian landscapes pockmarked by the 
  recurring images from his novels ...

  What's largely new, and savage, in this memoir is the level of 
  disillusionment Ballard came to feel during the war, about both 
  England and his own distant parents.  "The dream of empire died when
  Shanghai surrendered without a fight," he writes. "Even at the age 
  of 11 or 12 I knew that no amount of patriotic newsreels would put the
  Union Jack jigsaw together again.  From then on I was slightly suspicious
  of all British adults."

  The cozy England he loved, he discovers, "was a complete fantasy."  He
  takes aim at the country's class system, calling it "an instrument of
  political control."  ...

  I'm not sure I've read a more comprehensive takedown of the postwar
  British psyche than Ballard's observation that the country's social 
  codes -- "show respect for one's elders, never be too keen, take it on
  the chin," etc. -- were calculated to create a sense of overpowering
  deference, and certainly not the qualities that had made Shanghai great,
  or, for that matter, won the Battle of Britain."  What these things 
  inculcated, he suggests, was "second-rateness and low expectations."

  In his own novels and stories, he says, "I've treated England as if it
  were a strange fiction."  His early work bent toward science fiction
  because so-called serious writing was too insular. ..."

26 Sep 2020

- Without Tears In My Heart by Graham Robb, review of *Correspondance* by 
  Balzac in *TLS*, Mar 16 2012, p. 7 (no link):
  
  "What does a novelist need? Balzac's letters suggest the following:
  a peaceful place to work; a home full of beautiful, expensive objects
  'to create happiness and a sense of intellectual freedom'; coffee strong
  enough to maintain the flow of inspiration for two months; debts and 
  publishers' contracts with draconian penalty clauses to reinforce 
  self-discipline and compulsion; several aliases and hiding places to
  prevent the creditors' bailiffs from confiscating the expensive objects;
  and a constant state of romantic excitation without the time-consuming 
  consquences of love. 

  The main task Balzac had set himself was to create a complete panorama
  of French society in a monumental series of novels and studies to be 
  published under the title *La Comedie Humaine*.  Strange to say, the other
  projects were a form of avoidance, and, as any procrastinator knows,
  procrastination can be very hard work."

25 Sep 2020

- Too Sane for Surbiton by Gerard Woodward, review of *Waking up in Toytown*
  by John Burnside in *TLS*, Mar 5 2010, p. 24 (no link):
  
  "... this is the story of a man who, after years of depression, decline,
  and DeQuincyesque excess, finds that he desires, more than anything else,
  normality. 'A normal life. Sober. Drug-free.  Dreamless.  In gainful 
  employment.  A householder.  A taxpayer.  A name on the electoral role.'
  Perhaps it is a measure of anyone's madness that they should yearn for 
  these things, and the quest is double-edged; what Burnside is really after
  is a sense of stability, safety and continuity, and this book is an eloquent
  demonstration that, once actively pursued, the concept of normality mutates,
  bifurcates, and dissolves.

  ... one of the delights of this book is that, although Burnside takes up
  residence in the heart of the land of the normal, his fellow suburbanites
  turn out to be anything but.  ... He ... strikes up a friendship ... only 
  to find himself embroiled in a *Strangers on a Train*-style murder swapping
  plot.  Burnside has to disappoint his friend by saying there isn't
  anyone he wants doing in. ...

  Nearly always, Burnside is the more moderate, sane voice among the people
  he meets ... All the while he grows more dispirited with the type of 
  normality he has found for himself. ...  

  There is an urgent, restlessly explicating tone to the writing that 
  can sometimes overshadow the more subtle ironies, so that one can't
  be sure if Burnside is being funny when, in the middle of all the
  self-analysis, he comes up with a sentence like, 'It was a Saturday
  afternoon and I was trawling around Guildford looking for a new toaster'.
  ... "

24 Sep 2020

- Rock Bottom by Anna Vaux, review of *Wonderful Today* by Pattie Boyd 
  and *Eric Clapton* by Eric Clapton in *TLS*, Apr 11 2008, p. 10-11 (no link):

  "Marriage is hard, but Marriage to a rock star is really hard.  Everyone
  knows that -- except perhaps the people who do it, like Pattie Boyd, who
  did it twice, first to George Harrison ... and then to Eric Clapton ...

  Indeed, the irony -- or is it the pity? -- is that it was precisely 
  because marriage to a rock star was so not wonderful that she found 
  herself seeking solace in the arms of another one; and once she'd married
  the other one, it was so not wonderful all over again that she regretted
  she'd left the first one.  If anything could be worse than marriage to 
  George -- who by the late days of their relationship was spending long
  hours chanting in a temple he had built at the top of their house ... 
  it was marriage to Eric, who even in the early days of their
  relationship was ... getting through a couple of bottles of brandy a day
  plus 'copious amounts of Special Brew ...' ...

  Alas, Pattie doesn't seem to have had much left in the way of personal
  volition by this time to rally herself to the realization that she'd made
  a mistake.  ... Modeling was not much of a preparation for anything.
  'You need to be told what to do and how to look', she explains when 
  describing what her job entailed. ... Her increasing and then total 
  uselessness was part of what was so problematic in her marriages.  So if
  her book is instructive in any way, it is as a cautionary tale, on a kind
  of feminist model. ... she has no money of her own.  She wanders through her
  pages in an agony of redundancy, taking up knitting, flying, art classes, 
  chanting ... George doesn't even need her for sex. ... (Eric) confesses
  that once he'd got her home he didn't want her any longer. ...

  *Eric Clapton* is the story of an alcoholic before it is the story of
  a musician ... His relationship with drink is the principal relationship
  of his life: however much he thought he wanted Pattie, the only thing
  he couldn't live without was alcohol.  Pattie made the same mistake in 
  believing she was marrying a rock star, when in fact she was marrying 
  someone closer to the derelicts Clapton brought home on his way back
  from the pub.

  But one can hardly blame her for not working it out, since Clapton
  himself is confused, unable to decide from the start if he's special or
  just like everyone else ... Clapton wonders if his confusion has
  something to do with the famous graffito on the wall of the Underground
  station declaring  'Clapton is God' ... But you cannot read this book
  and not notice how often he says he wanted to step back, to blend into
  the band or just to play rhythm. ... (Unlike) playing with Cream, where
  you can hear his discomfort in the way he sings, and whose show-off
  personalities were so difficult for him to manage that he panicked at
  the thought of ever forming a group again. ...

  It is a defining moment for Clapton when he realizes that he no longer
  wants or needs to have hits, and yet the hits keep on coming -- a paradox
  made clear with his 1991 album *Unplugged*, which at last opened the door
  to his true musical tastes ... and then became the biggest selling album
  of his career.  However much he thought he was sloughing off the virtuoso
  image, it seems only to have gone in the opposite direction, bizarrely taking
  him with it. ...

  But by now everything is tied up with his recovery work (he has set up a
  rehabilitation clinic ...). Twenty years sober (and sixty-two years old),
  Clapton is more twelve steps than twelve bars, and narrates his book
  for the most part with the flattened-out tone of the recovering alcoholic ...

  Pattie Boyd also reports that she writes from a 'healthy perspective' and
  'position of strength' ... Hers is a recovery story too -- but it is 
  Eric Clapton she had to recover from, to whom she is far more forgiving
  than the readers of her book will be. ..."

19 Sep 2020

- Buckets of Blud by Peter Thoneman, review of *The Oxford Handbook of
  Warfare in the Classical World*, *Roman Seige Warfare*,  and several other
  books in *TLS*,   May 9, 2014, p. 7-8 (no link):

  "... Livy on Hannibal, Caesar's *Gallic Wars*.  For those of a certain
  age, memories of O level or School Certificate Latin will be filled with
  grammar and men killing one another. ... 

  Today's GSE Latin is a gentler, less martial world.  *The Cambridge
  Latin Course* no longer requires you to translate mysterious sentences
  like 'The camp had been fortified with a palisade so high that the enemy
  did not try to cross it'.  Hannibal has given way to mildly racy bits of
  Ovid, and the AQA exam board would no more dare to set Caesar's *Civil
  Wars* than they would Augustine's *City of God*.

  Still, the old emphasis on camps and cavalry did have one thing to be
  said for it: it was true to a central element of ordinary life in the ancient
  world. ... The fall of great cities, the violent death of their menfolk
  and slavery for their women, was part of the common stock of human 
  experience in antiquity. ... So in a sense the old O level syllabus
  had it right: starting with Caesar's *Gallic Wars* at least has the 
  merit of forcing us to confront the casual, unreflective militarism
  of the ancient world.

  ... from Thucydides to Ammianus, there survives a vast ancient literature
  of surging legionaries, desperate valour, and generals throwing their
  cavalry thousands of paces over the river.  The trouble is that, as
  historians have gradually come to recognize, almost all of this stuff 
  is idealizing fantasy, not reportage.  When a particular battle is described
  by more than one author, more often than not the accounts are wildly 
  contradictory.

  Josh Leviathan's *Roman Seige Warfare* is a fairly typical sample of the
  surging-legionaries school of military history. ... assaults, sallies,
  sallies taking the form of assaults,  Gauls attacking ditches with
  arrows.  Need one emphasize that all this is the purest fiction?
  Caesar's self-serving 'narrative' of the seige of Alesia is so
  delibrately bland and stereotyped as to be completely meaningless --
  indeed, ... it is hard to think of a more systematically dishonest
  ancient text than Caesar's *Gallic Wars*, the work of a very clever and
  unscrupulous aristocrat pretending to be a plain-speaking soldier.

  The embedding of military history into the broader cultural history of
  the ancient world is clearly the best way out of the subject's current
  intellectual ghetto. ... Thucydides has no particular interest in
  battles, weapons, or cavalry tactics.  For him, the Peloponnesian War
  was interesting  because it revealed, in the starkest form, the
  subterranean tensions and ethical faultlines of Greek *polis*-society.
  Warfare is always  part of a larger social system.  Or, to paraphrase
  Molesworth: just what was it about Greek and Roman society than
  encouraged so many people to spend so much of their time attacking
  ditches?"

18 Sep 2020

- NB by J.C. in *TLS*, Apr 22 2011, p. 32 (no link):

  "Old English.  Who speaks it now?  Just about everyone who speaks English.
  We do not know how the Anglo-Saxons sounded in the sixth century, but
  in a recently published book, *How To Read a Word* (OUP), Elizabeth
  Knowles provides a list of 'Old English words still in use today'.
  It includes: 

  ale, bird, black, blood, bread, bride, calf, child, chin,
  church, clothes, corn, cow, day, death, deer, drink, eat, eye, fat,
  father, feather, field, five, fox, glass, good, gold, goose, hammer, 
  hand, harvest, hawk, heaven, hell, ivy, jowl, kettle, key, king, lady,
  man, meat, mouse, murder, nail, name, night, nose, oak, pound, queen,
  rain, salt, sea, seven, silk, snake, snow, song, sword, teach, ten, 
  thief, thigh, thumb, thunder, tongue, walk, wife, woman, worm, year, youth."

17 Sep 2020

- Our Hand Reaches Far by Patrick McGuinness, review of *Burying the
  Typewriter: Childhood Under the Eyes of the Secret Police* by Carmen Bugan
  in *TLS*, Nov 9 2012, p. 10 (no link):
  
  "Bugan and her family leave Romania in late October 1989 ... We are less than
  two months from the regime's violent downfall, yet all the structures of
  repression are still intact.  Totalitarianism, in Romania's case at least,
  doesn't wear itself away at the edges: it works full throttle until the moment
  it breaks down, and then it breaks down completely.
  
  The scenes in Prague or at the Berlin Wall become symbols of the peaceful
  end of Communism, but the haunting, brutal images of the Romanian
  revolution and the Ceausescus' grubby trial and execution symbolize
  something bloodier and darker about Europe's recent history.
  
  Looking at those images now -- the confused, blinking dictator and his
  deluded wife being shouted at by lawyers who two days before had been
  saluting their portraits, and then shot like dogs by soldiers who 
  twenty-four hours earlier had been enforcing their brutal orders -- it
  is hard not to think that when regimes end, they end the Romanian way:
  in a chaos of pent-up violence, mixed motives, self-preservation, hypocrisy,
  side-switching and herd mentality. ..."

- Won to Death by Omer Bartov, review of *Kiev 1941* by David Stahel in *TLS*,
  July 20 2012 (no link):

  "In 1955 the brilliant German tactician, Field Marshal Erich von Manstein,
  published his war memoir and apologia under the evocative title *Lost 
  Victories*.  This was the heyday of self-serving accounts by Hitler's former
  generals. ... There were many others.  Besides their highly esteemed
  professional skills as soldiers, what these men and many of their ilk had 
  in common was their utter loyalty to Hitler and his regime and their
  dedication to winning an ideological war of expansion and subjugation at
  whose core was the goal of genocide and extermination.

  In their memoirs, these generals tried to play down those no longer 
  popular and, for them, incriminating sentiments and ideas. ... Histories
  of the Second World War described the German army as having fought an
  honorable, not to say chivalrous war, while the SS and Gestapo carried out
  their nasty work behind the backs of the fighting troops. It took a new 
  generation of scholars to begin disputing the assertions of the Wehrmacht's 
  so-called purity of arms. Starting in the 1960s, and increasingly since the
  late 1970s, historians have shown the deep complicity of Hitler's army
  in war crimes on an unprecedented scale ...

  This recognition of the role played by Hitler's soldiers in implementing
  what he termed a war of annihilation has not deterred more traditional 
  miltary historians from churning out ever-more meticulous accounts of 
  battles and operations.   Since so many of these already exist, and
  because it is difficult to come up with any particularly striking thesis
  that has not already been propounded, such histories tend to narrow their
  gaze and constrict their horizons, even as they lay claim to new insights
  which are either not very new or not particularly insightful.

  David Stahel's new book .. provides more information on war crimes 
  committed by the German military than many similar accounts, yet fails
  to link them in any meaningful manner to the overall conduct of the war 
  ... For what is needed most in the current state of scholarship is to 
  analyze the relationship between war and genocide, rather than to ride
  once more on one of Guderan's Panzers toward an increasingly predictable
  lost victory.

  It is this link between mass murder of civilians and brutal modern
  warfare that is missing from Stahel's book. Instead we read the familiar
  account of frantic, at times heroic fighting, brilliant, but at times
  also stupid leadership, lost victories and dreadful defeats. ... it
  tells us little about the world these soldiers had almost succeeded  in
  building.   All this vast shedding of blood by Germany and its allies
  had but one ultimate goal --  the systematic murder of entire
  populations ..."
  
14 Sep 2020

- Lost in the Funhouse by Edmund White, in *TLS* May 19 2006, p. 15
  (no link):

  "Autobiographies are more popular, these days, than fiction, even 
  autobiographical fiction.  When I was young and even in my early middle 
  age, only famous people wrote their memoirs. ... I suppose that's one
  reason why in 1982 I wrote an autobiographical novel ...
  a proper non-fictional memoir would have seemed presumptuous back then.

  Incidentally, the project of writing a novel gave me a different goal --
  the need to create interest on the part of the  reader -- whereas a memoir
  assumes that interest already exits.  Finally, the writer's contract with the
  reader in a memoir is to tell the truth and nothing but the truth, whereas
  a novelist has made clear his intention to invent, compress, rearrange, 
  and streamline. ..."

  "... As a true American I do believe in identity politics, I believe that
  the personal can be political and I believe that, for better or for worse,
  my sexual identity is crucial to who I am. ...  But I hold this view 
  only because I feel that to grow up in a religious society that oppresses
  and stigmatizes homosexuals *creates* a gay identity, and that one can only
  liberate oneself by affirming that identity, by transforming what was despised
  into what is valued.

  I'm not an essentialist; I don't think that gay men today are like gay men
  in ancient Rome or even in nineteenth-century England, and I certainly don't
  think that this essence must be declared or avowed.  I do, however, believe
  that a definition that has been imposed on the individual must be defended 
  and transcended.

  I write at length abut my sexual experiences and inclinations because for a
  gay man sexuality is inevitably more formative than for a heterosexual.
  If a man is gay he belongs to a minority; his entire social status and
  psychological make-up will be altered by that orientation, as will his
  habits and and tastes and friendships, even his home address.  Heterosexuality
  is normative and inclusive ... it imposes no, as it were, extra weight on 
  the individual; it certainly doesn't keep him out of any clubs, except a
  few gay ones. ..."
  
12 Sep 2020

- Variations on Looney Tunes by Allen H. Nelson, review of *Shakespeare
  by Another Name: ... Edward De Vere, Earl of Oxford, the man who was
  Shakespeare* by Mark Anderson in *TLS* Jan 27 2006, p.30 (no link):

  "Anderson's reductionist principle, that an author knows only himself 
  and can tell only his own tale, explains the monomania of the enterprise.
  For the minute it is conceded that one human being can imagine the internal
  life of another, the principle loses its explanatory power. ...

  ... Fellow conspiracy-theorists will congratulate him on his totalizing 
  vision, and his practically metaphysical ability to find similarities
  in things unlike.  Readers with the backbone to demand proof at every step
  will dismiss Anderson's interminable maundering as mere rubbish."

- Too Rich and Too Thin by Edward St. Aubyn, review of *Riviera* 
  by Jim Ring in *TLS* Aug 6 2004, p. 25 (no link):

  "There is something inherently depressing about rich-people anecdotes.
  Whatever the details (they drank champagne from a shoe!  They imported
  rolls of lawn from England!), the stories are essentially about shopping
  and are doomed to fall into two basic categories: extravagance and 
  meanness.  Either someone likes the soup so much they buy the hotel
  and then give it to the waiter as a tip, or, despite being the richest
  person on earth, they make their guests pay for a stamp."

12 Sep 2020

- *The Valley of Bones*, a novel by Anthony Powell (1964), p. 233 (no link)

  "I thought of Pennistone and his quotations from Vigny.

  'A French writer who'd been a regular officer said the whole point of 
  soldiering was its bloody boring side.  The glamour, such as it was, 
  was just a bit of exceptional luck if it came your way.'

  'Did he?' said Gwatkin.  

  He spoke without a vestige of interest. I was impressed for the ten
  thousandth time by the fact that literature illuminates life only for
  those to whom books are a necessity.  Books are unconvertible assets, to
  be passed on only to those who possess them already."

11 Sep 2020, 9 Dec 2020

- https://mathoverflow.net/questions/43690/whats-a-mathematician-to-do - 
  What's a mathematician to do? answer by Bill Thurston:

  "It's not *mathematics* that you need to contribute to. It's deeper than
  that: how might you contribute to humanity, and even deeper, to the
  well-being of the world, by pursuing mathematics? ...
    
  The product of mathematics is clarity and understanding. ...
  The world does not suffer from an oversupply of clarity and
  understanding (to put it mildly). How and whether specific mathematics
  might lead to improving the world (whatever that means) is usually
  impossible to tease out, but mathematics collectively is extremely
  important.

  I think of mathematics as having a large component of psychology,
  because of its strong dependence on human minds. ...
  Mathematical ideas, even simple ideas, are often hard to transplant from
  mind to mind. There are many ideas in mathematics that may be hard to
  get, but are easy once you get them. ...
  Mathematics is commonly explained and recorded in symbolic and concrete
  forms that are easy to communicate, rather than in conceptual forms that
  are easy to understand once communicated. Translation in the direction
  conceptual -> concrete and symbolic is much easier than translation in
  the reverse direction, and symbolic forms often replace the conceptual
  forms of understanding. ...

  .. All of us have clear understanding of a few things and murky concepts of
  many more. There is no way to run out of ideas in need of clarification. ..."

  (Compare to Eugenia Cheng excerpt, 10 Mar 2019)

- https://arxiv.org/abs/math/0503081 - Mathematical Education by Bill Thurston

  "One feature of mathematics which requires special care in education is
  its height, that is, the extent to which concepts build on previous
  concepts. Reasoning in mathematics can be very clear and certain, and,
  once a principle is established, it can be relied on. This means it is
  possible to build conceptual structures which are at once very tall,
  very reliable, and extremely powerful.

  The structure is not like a tree, but more like a scaffolding, with
  many interconnected supports. Once the scaffolding is solidly in
  place, it is not hard to build it higher, but it is impossible to build
  a layer before previous layers are in place.

  Difficulties arise because students taking a particular course are in
  different stages of mastery of the earlier learning. They also tend to
  be secretive about exactly what they know and what they don't know. ...
  students feel guilty that they are shaky ... and are slow to admit it
  and ask how and why ... even to themselves.

  ... It is not so hard, when talking with students individually, to find
  out what parts of the structure need shoring up and to deal with those
  parts individually. But it is quite difficult to find a level of
  teaching which is comprehensible and at the same time interesting to an
  entire class with heterogeneous background."

  "Mathematics is amazingly compressible: you may struggle a long time,
  step by step, to work through some process or idea from several
  approaches. But once you really understand it and have the mental
  perspective to see it as a whole, there is often a tremendous mental
  compression. You can file it away, recall it quickly and completely when
  you need it, and use it as just one step in some other mental process.
  The insight that goes with this compression is one of the real joys of
  mathematics.

  After mastering mathematical concepts, even after great effort, it
  becomes very hard to put oneself back in the frame of mind of someone to
  whom they are mysterious.

  One of my students wrote about visiting an elementary school and being
  asked to tutor a child in subtracting fractions. He was startled and
  sobered to see how much is involved in learning this skill for the first
  time, a skill which had condensed to a triviality in his mind.

  Mathematics is full of this kind of thing, on all levels. It never stops.

  The hard-earned and powerful tools which are available almost
  unconsciously to mathematicians, but not to students, make it hard for
  mathematicians to learn from their students. This puts a psychological
  barrier in the way of listening fully to students.
  It is important in teaching mathematics to work hard to overcome this
  barrier and to get out of the way enough to give students the chance to
  work things out for themselves."

  "To me, utilitarian goals are important, but secondary.
  Mathematics has a remarkable beauty, power, and coherence, more than we
  could have ever expected. It is always changing, as we turn new corners
  and discover new delights and unexpected connections with old familiar
  grounds. The changes are rapid, because of the solidity of the kind of
  reasoning involved in mathematics.

  Mathematics is like a flight of fancy, but one in which the fanciful
  turns out to be real and to have been present all along. Doing
  mathematics has the feel of fanciful invention, but it is really a
  process of sharpening our perception so that we discover patterns that
  are everywhere around. ...

  My experience as a mathematician has convinced me that the aesthetic
  goals and the utilitarian goals for mathematics turn out, in the end, to
  be quite close. Our aesthetic instincts draw us to mathematics of a
  certain depth and connectivity. The very depth and beauty of the
  patterns makes them likely to be manifested, in unexpected ways, in
  other parts of mathematics, science, and the world."

- https://arxiv.org/abs/math/9404236 - 
  Proof and Progress in Mathematics by Bill Thurston

  "I have spent a fair amount of effort during periods of my career
  exploring mathematical questions by computer. In view of that
  experience, I was astonished to see the statement of (other authors)
  that mathematics is extremely slow and arduous, and that it is arguably
  the most disciplined of all human activities. The standard of
  correctness and completeness necessary to get a computer program to work
  at all is a couple of orders of magnitude higher than the mathematical
  community's standard of valid proofs. ...

  I think that mathematics is one of the most intellectually gratifying of
  human activities. Because we have a high standard for clear and
  convincing thinking and because we place a high value on listening to
  and trying to understand each other, we don't engage in interminable
  arguments and endless redoing of our mathematics. We are prepared to be
  convinced by others. Intellectually, mathematics moves very quickly.
  Entire mathematical landscapes change and change again in amazing ways
  during a single career.

  Mathematics as we practice it is much more formally complete and precise
  than other sciences, but it is much less formally complete and precise
  for its content than computer programs. The difference has to do not
  just with the amount of effort: the kind of effort is qualitatively
  different. In large computer programs, a tremendous proportion of effort
  must be spent on myriad compatibility issues: making sure that all
  definitions are consistent, developing good data structures that have
  useful but not cumbersome generality, deciding on the right generality
  for functions, etc. ... Because of compatibility issues that almost
  inevitably escalate out of hand because the right definitions change as
  generality and functionality are added, computer programs usually need
  to be rewritten frequently, often from scratch.

  A very similar kind of effort would have to go into mathematics to make
  it formally correct and complete. It is not that formal correctness is
  prohibitively difficult on a small scale --- it's that there are many possible
  choices of formalization on small scales that translate to huge numbers
  of interdependent choices in the large. It is quite hard to make these
  choices compatible; to do so would certainly entail going back and
  rewriting from scratch all old mathematical papers whose results we
  depend on. ...

  ... Our system is quite good at producing reliable theorems that
  can be solidly backed up. It's just that the reliability does not
  primarily come from mathematicians formally checking formal arguments;
  it comes from mathematicians thinking carefully and critically about
  mathematical ideas."

- https://www.ams.org/journals/notices/202011/rnoti-p1791.pdf -
  Proving Theorems with Computers by Kevin Buzzard

  About a project to formalize large parts of mathematics, confronting 
  the difficulties Thurston described above.  

  "(In) a course introducing the formal notion of proof ... there   might
  be a proof that distinct equivalence classes for an equivalence relation
  are disjoint.  There are many ways that one can attempt to teach this to
  undergraduates.  Recently I have become fond of  a method where I bring
  a set of around 100 plastic shapes coloured red, yellow, green, and blue
  into class. ...  the red shapes form an equivalence class, the blue
  shapes form another, and so on.  The fact that distinct equivalence
  classes are disjoint is now obvious. However this is an example, not a
  proof. The formal proof, which I then  go on to show the students, is a
  series of elementary steps, each of which follows from the rules of
  logic or the axioms of an equivalence relation.

  In proofs such as these, we are operating very close to the "machine"
  which drives formal mathematics -- the machine which tells us that if
  *P* is true, and if *P* implies *Q*, ,then *Q* is true, and other such
  logical rules. ... At this stage in the development of mathematics,
  every proof can be chased right down to the axioms of the system we are
  considering, and students are expected to learn from such courses that
  mathematics can be done in this way.  Much (but as we are about to see,
  not all) undergraduate pure mathematics is of this form.

  After a while it becomes inconvenient to do mathematics in a purely
  axiomatic fashion.  For example, proving that if we remove a finite set
  of points from *R2* the resulting topological space is still path
  connected could of course *in theory* be done from the axioms, but in
  practice ... one would just draw a picture. ... Over time, students
  learning mathematics begin to understand our unwritten rules of "what is
  allowed in practice." ... Arguments in lectures may take place high
  above the axioms, with technical details being dismissed as obvious or
  easy to verify, and left to the reader (perhaps with some hints). This
  is the beginning of what Terry Tao has called the *post-rigorous* stage
  of mathematics. To borrow a phrase from computer science, students begin
  to learn the intuitive *front end* of mathematics.

  Those students who convince us that they can steer their mathematical
  arguments correctly are rewarded by being given PhD places. ...
  They are allowed access to the mathematical literature, and from now on
  they can assume any result they like, as long as it is published in a
  reasonably prestigious journal and their advisor believes it. ...
  By the time they graduate, a PhD student will typically know many
  theorem statements concerning the objects they chose to study ...
  Again to borrow a phrase from computer science, the student knows
  the *interface* to each object in their area of expertise.  The student is
  allowed to assume any results in the interface, and might well know how
  to prove some of them -- but possibly not all of them.

  For example, when I was a PhD student, I had not read the details of the
  proof of the theorem of Deligne which attached a *p*-adic Galois 
  representation to a modular form, a key result from the interface to the
  theory of modular forms upon which my entire PhD work was based. In
  fact, at that time there was only really a sketch proof of the result in
  the literature. This was not however a problem, because the proof of
  Deligne's theorem was "known to the experts."  Students are expected to
  get their own intuition of their area, and after a while should have a
  feeling about what is accessible given known results, and what requires
  genuinely new ideas.

  In the rest of this article, I would like to discuss the idea that
  computers can be taught mathematics in much the same sort of way. ..."

  More about this formalization project:
  https://leanprover-community.github.io/papers
  
30 Aug 2020

- *A Mixture of Frailties*, a novel by Robertson Davies (1958), p. 210 - 211, 
  274 (no link):

  "... What's the good of fighting critics?  Mind you, some of them are
  very able, particularly when judging performances.  But only a few can
  form any opinion of a new work.   Most of them are simply on the lookout
  for novelty.  They hear too much, and they hear it in the wrong way.
  They get like children who are peevish from having too many toys; they are
  always tugging at the skirts of music, whining 'Amuse me; give me something
  new.'  Giles hasn't shown them anything particularly new.  He's not an
  innovator.  But he has an extraordinary melodic gift.  Now you just watch
  the critics and see how many of them are able to spot that."

  "... Like many people when they suddenly get their own way, she saw the 
  hand of God in it."

27 Jul -- 2 Aug 2020

- *A History of Histories* by John Burrow (2007) quoting
  *The Civilization of the Renaissance in Italy* by Jacob Burckhardt (1860),
  p. 391 - 392 in Burrow (no link):

  - "For an ambitious youth, the fame and brilliant position of the
    humanists were a perilous temptation. ... He was thus led to plunge
    into a life of excitement and vicissitude, in which exhausting
    studies, tutorships, secretaryships, professorships, offices in
    princely households, mortal enemies and perils, luxury and beggary,
    boundless admiration and boundless contempt, followed confusedly one
    upon the other."

  Quoting *The Making of the English Working Class* by E. P. Thompson (1963),
  p. 469 in Burrow (no link):

  - "I am seeking to rescue the poor stockinger, the Luddite cropper, the
    'obsolete' hand-loom weaver, the 'utopian' artisan, and even the 
    deluded followers of Joanna Southcott [a millenarian prophet] from the
    enormous condescension of posterity"

  On *Roll, Jordan, Roll: The World the Slaves Made* by Eugene Genovese (1974),
  p. 469 in Burrow (no link):

  "Genovese traced the culture the slaves created for themselves, under the
  most adverse of circumstances, out of the Bible, contact with white society,
  and African influences, as something new and unique, not merely traditional
  or imitative. Genovese's is a highly impressive book, which made an 
  important general point. ... It meant seeing as agents and makers groups 
  which had hitherto tended to figure in historical accounts only as 
  sufferers of their grim fates or, for the administrative or governmental
  mind (reflected in some historians), as problems and even nuisances."
  
 7 Jul 2020

- *Hellgoing* by Lynn Coady (2013), from the story 'The Natural Elements' 
  p. 142, 149 (no link):  
  "... Big money! Big payoff! To own property that close to the university,
  was, this past year, like sitting in your backyard and having the ground
  suddenly start to rumble and spew oil like on *The Beverly Hillbillies*.
  It was a city of Beverly Hillbillies lately -- everyone cashing in. ...
  It was like with construction these days -- too much work, too few
  companies.  There were always bigger, more lucrative jobs.  Workmen tore
  holes in people's walls, went away, and never returned.

  What was the good of all this money?  If it made no one responsible 
  to anyone else?  If it made life not easier, but in some cases 
  impossible?  He thought of this as he pulled up to the non-existent
  sidewalk ... buried, like everything, in snow. ..."

 2 Jun 2020

- https://www.buzzfeednews.com/article/brandontaylor/i-dont-miss-being-a-scientist-except-when-i-do -
  Working In Science Was A Brutal Education. That's Why I Left.  
  By Brandon Taylor, author of the novel *Real Life*.

  "*Do you miss being a scientist?* some people ask.

  ... Science was beautiful and it was wild and it was unknowable. Science
  was spending days and weeks on a single experiment with no way to know
  if it would work and no real way to tell if it *had* worked. Science was
  like trying to find your way to a dark forest only to realize that you
  had always been *inside* of the forest and that the forest is inside of
  another, greater, darker forest. ... Science was being taught to think.
  Taught to speak. Science was a finishing school. Science was a brutal
  education. Science made me ruthless. Science made me understand the vast
  beauty of the world. ..."

  "*Does science influence your writing?*

   ... People presume that science and writing are quite different. But they
   are both ways of knowing. They are ways of understanding the greater
   mystery of the world. They are systems of knowledge and inquiry. I do
   not understand something until I have written it, or more accurately
   put, until I have written my way *through* it.

   I think in many ways, the best preparation for a writer is a period of
   prolonged and rigorous thought about a difficult and complicated
   question. You learn to assemble your resources. You learn to fight with
   yourself. You learn to quarrel on the page with your worst ideas and
   with the ones you hold dearest. You treat your expectations with
   suspicion. You demand *proof*. You demand *evidence*. You think hard about
   the alternate hypothesis or other explanations, and you devise
   strategies to root these out. You learn to live with doubt. You try to
   prove yourself wrong. You look for places where you have been too soft.
   Too vague. You eliminate language that contains falsehoods. You
   eliminate language that can mislead your reader. You ask questions. You
   pursue answers with all the energy you can muster. You try to put
   language to what it is you observe. You develop a stamina for
   iteration. You develop a thick skin. You learn to seek criticism. You
   treat criticism like kindness. You churn the raw material of life into
   something that can be understood, and when you fail, you marvel at the
   mystery of things."

   "*Do you miss science?*

   ... I think if people knew what it was that I left, then they'd know better
   than to ask. It would be like asking someone if they were sad to have
   left their home with no prospect of returning. It would be like asking
   someone if they were sad to have left their faith behind. It would be
   like asking someone if they were sad to have given up some fundamental
   idea about who they are. It would be like asking someone if they were
   sad to have watched their life burn to the ground. It would be like
   asking someone if they were sad to have left their family and friends. ...

   When people ask if I miss science, the only answer available to me is
   an incomplete solution to the problem: *Yes. No. Sometimes. It's over
   now.*"

 2 May 2020

- *Arithmetic* by Paul Lockhart (2017), pages vii, 93, 151 (no link):
  "Arithmetic is the skillful arrangement of numerical information
  for ease of communication and comparison ... 
  Being good at it doesn't make you particularly smart or 
  mathematically inclined ... Similarly, begin unskilled at arithmetic    
  does not mean you are stupid or that you do not have a mathematical
  mind.  Arithmetic is just like any other craft; you can get good at it if
  you want to, but it is no big deal either way. ...

  ... let's understand that *7 x 8* is not a question and *56* is not an
  answer.  Seven times eight is a *number*, and it is capable of being 
  represented a great many ways.  At the moment it is held as seven groups of
  eight, and a user of an octal system would be quite pleased and would not
  feel the need to "do" anything to it.  When we ask, "What is seven times 
  eight?" what we are really asking is, "How can seven groups of eight be 
  rearranged into groups of ten for ease of comparison with other numbers that
  are similarly grouped?"  Numbers couldn't care less what grouping system you
  happen to use and neither do mathematicians.  Numbers are what they are, and 
  they do what they do; your desire to *compare* is the issue, and your 
  culturally determined choice of representation system is quite secondary.
  Another thing to notice is that when we say something like "seven times ten
  is seventy," there is an amusing content-free circularity to such a 
  statement.  After all, the word *seventy* is simply an abbreviated form of
  seven tens. ...

  So the practical problem of arithmetic has been completely and utterly
  solved. ... The long historical saga of representation systems and 
  abacuses has come to an end.  So you can take your tabula and your calculus
  stones, your counting coins and soroban and throw them all away.  Leave the
  pencil and paper in the drawer.  If you need to do some Hindu-Arabic 
  decimal place-value arithmetic, simply take out your phone and push some
  buttons.

  There is no cause for weeping and moaning; it is simply the way of all
  things.  Where is your family spinning wheel? ... you can still do arithmetic 
  by hand if you want to.  Perhaps this may even rekindle your relationship
  to pencil-and-paper arithmetic, seeing it anew as a quaint, outmoded
  thirteenth-century folk art.  Whatever.  The point is that the story of 
  arithmetic, at least from a mundane practical point of view, is over.
  Now we can turn our attention to the more conceptual, theoretical 
  aspects of this beautiful subject.  Our goal is not utility or practicality
  but intellectual pleasure and understanding."
  
24 Apr 2020 

- https://www.pippinbarr.com/2017/03/03/maybe-its-important-to-hate-what-you-do/ -
  "Kind of hate (my project) *v r 3*  these days, just so you know. It's not an uncommon 
  experience for me with any project that takes longer than a week or so, 
  and I think it's probably not uncommon for many of us working on any 
  creative project. ...
  One way I've found helpful for dealing with this, especially for *v r 3* 
  actually, has been forcing myself to kind of fall in love with all the 
  problems by finding them "interesting". ...
  things are going wrong constantly, but ... that can be seen as a kind of 
  insight into the nature of making a videogame, or the nature of the 
  engine I'm using, ... and so on.
  That strategy worked very well for quite a long time for what has been a 
  deeply frustrating and humbling project. ...
  But ... now it just feels like the ground truth here is that I'm a bit of 
  a bumbling incompetent trying to do things that aren't very difficult and 
  failing. ...

  However, some small encouragement came the other day from ... (another artist).
  ...  he talks about how he always feels at his most unhappy working when 
  he's working on something important. That could just be yet another nice 
  psychological trick, like finding hardship interesting, but it's cheering 
  to think that maybe if you hate what you do it's because what you do is 
  just SO IMPORTANT. Too important to stop doing, for example.

  But then, if we're being brutally honest, you can't stop even if it's not 
  all that important, can you? You're making the stupid thing because at 
  some level that's just what you need to do right now. Throwing it in the 
  trash would be glorious, but you'd just be back a few minutes later 
  fishing it out."

  (Compare to Geoff Dyer's excerpt under 17 Feb 2019, the last two paragraphs
  about trying to write his book on D. H. Lawrence.)

21-29 Mar 2020

- *Measurement* by Paul Lockhart (2012), pages 1, 5, 50, 32-33, 36-37, 42-45, 
  125-127, 223-225, 295, 316-317, 320-327, 349-350 (no link):
  "There are many realities out there.  There is, of course, the physical
  reality we find ourselves in. ... I want to talk about a different sort of
  place.  I'm going to call it 'mathematical reality.' ... Mathematical 
  reality ... is imaginary.  I get to have all those perfect things I can't
  have in real life.  I will never hold a circle in my hand, but I
  can hold one in my mind.   And I can measure it. ..."

  "What is a math problem? To a mathematician, a problem is a *probe* --
  a test of mathematical reality to see how it behaves. ...
  The solution to a math problem is not a number; it's an argument,
  a proof.  We're trying to create these little poems of pure reason. ..."

  "What is measuring?  ... we are making a comparison. We are comparing the 
  thing we are measuring to the thing we are measuring it with.  
  In other words, *measuring is relative*. ... what sort of units do we 
  want for our imaginary mathematical universe?  For instance, how are we 
  going to measure the lengths of these two sticks?  Let's suppose ...
  that the first stick is exactly twice as long as the second.
  Does it really matter
  how many inches or centimeters they come out to be?  I certainly don't want
  to subject my beautiful mathematical universe to something mundane 
  and arbitrary like that.  ... One way to think if it
  is that we simply aren't going to have any units at all, just proportions.
  Since there isn't a natural choice of unit for measuring length, we won't 
  have one.  ... The other way to go is to say that since the units don't
  matter, we'll choose whatever unit is convenient. ... a simple 
  example would be the perimeter of a square.  If we choose our unit to be
  the side of the square, then the perimeter would obviously be 4.  What
  that really means is that for any square, the perimenter is four times
  as long as the side. ..."
 
  "... We need to be clear about the extent to which we have specified our
  objects so that we can ask well-posed, meaningful questions. ... let's
  suppose we select a particular length and imagine a square with sides that
  long.  *Now* is it locked down?  Yes, it is. ... any further demands that
  we make on it might not be achievable.  For example, if we want our square
  to have diagonals equal to its sides, well tough luck.  We don't get to have
  that.  Once a shape (or any structure in mathematics) is specified enough,
  the 'forces of mathematical nature' then dictate all of its behavior. We can
  certainly try to find out what is true, but we no longer have any say in the 
  matter. ... the real question about mathematical reality is: How much control
  do we have? ... How pliable is mathematical reality? ... Where can we push, 
  and where does it push back?"

  "The study of size and shape is called *geometry*.  One of the oldest and
  most influential problems in geometry is this one: how long is the diagonal
  of a square? ... Our diagonal to side proportion cannot be expressed as a 
  fraction in any way -- no matter how many pieces we divide our unit into,
  the diagonal will never come out evenly.   This discovery tends to have a 
  rather unsettling effect on people.  Usually, when we think about measuring
  something, we imagine it requiring only a finite number of applications of
  our ruler ... But this is not the case in mathematical reality. ...

  The number we've discovered is called the square root of two ... the only
  thing we really know about the square root of two is that its square is 2.
  We have no hope of saying what this number *is* ... though of course
  we can approximate it. ... the truth seems to be that we can't really 
  measure the diagonal of a square.  This is not to say that the diagonal
  doesn't exist or that it doesn't have a length.  It does.  The number is out
  there, we just can't talk about it in the way we want to.  The problem is 
  not with the diagonal, it's with our *language*.   Maybe it's the price we
  pay for mathematical beauty.  We've created this imaginary universe (the 
  only place where measurement is truly possible) and now we have to face the
  consequences.  Numbers like this that cannot be expressed as fractions are 
  called *irrational* (meaning 'not a ratio').  They arise naturally in 
  geometry, and we just have to somehow get comfortable with that. ..."

  "... This is our generalized Pythagorean theorem relating the third side of 
  a triangle to the other two sides and the angle between them.  ... We seem 
  to have three separate cases (with three separate formulas) depending on 
  whether the angle is less than, equal to, or greater than a right angle.
  This kind of thing is always a bit galling. ... Shouldn't there be one nice,
  simple pattern?  One way to proceed is simply to be clever with our 
  definition.  Since *cos C* (at present) only has meaning when *C* is less 
  than a right angle, we are free to give any meaning we wish when *C* is
  larger.  The idea is to do this in such a way that our Pythagorean relation
  remains valid in all three cases.  That is, *we let the pattern determine
  our choice of meaning*.  This is a major theme throughout mathematics; it
  could even be said that this is the essence of the art ...  What we have 
  done here is to *expand the meaning of cosine*. ... With this choice of
  meaning for cosine, we get a single Pythagorean relation valid for all
  angles."

  "... A shape has a shape, but a motion is a *relationship*.  How can we 
  'see' a relationship?  One idea, of course is to make a graph.  In the case
  of a point moving on a line, we could imagine a chart with say, time as
  the horizontal and position as the vertical. ... what we end up making is
  a curve. ... The point itself is traveling within a one-dimensional space,
  whereas the curve here, this graph of the motion, is sitting in a 
  two-dimensional space.  ... This environment is called *space-time*. ...
  In this way, all motions can be thought of statically -- a motion in space
  is the same thing as a curve in space-time, and this curve does not move.
  ... Rather than asking how things move in our universe, a physicist ...
  can reprhase the question as, what curves in space-time are possible?"

  "... The idea is to subsume the study of shape and motion into the larger, 
  more abstract world of numerical variables and relationships.  This 
  viewpoint not only has the benefit of simplicity (there are no units to 
  worry about and we don't need to visualize anything) but also tremendous
  flexibility and generality."

  "A symbolic computation system ... is called a *calculus*. ... Thus we 
  have the *multiplicative calculus* of elementary arithmetic, which includes
  a few procedures such as carrying and shifting, as well as the infamous
  times tables.
  The amazing power of this system is that it allows us to quickly and easily 
  perform calculations that would otherwise be very time consuming and 
  laborious.  To multiply 1876 by 316 ... nobody has to do the backbreaking 
  work of laying out 1876 rows of 316 rocks and then counting the whole
  mess by hand.  A calculus is a fantastic thing to have.

  It is also a very rare thing to have.  Most problems in mathematics do not
  afford such systematic treatment.  In fact, most ... have required 
  tremendous ingenuity and specific individual treatment.  Every once in a 
  great while, a class of problems comes along for which a calculus can be
  developed, and it is always a major achievement.
  So it is a cause of great celebration that we have a differential calculus
  -- a systematic procedure for calculating differentials that does not require
  'pushing rocks together'; that is, it spares us from having to apply the
  method of exhaustion from scratch.  ..."

  "... I was telling you about Archimedes's measurement (of the area) of the
  parabola. ...  Archimedes proved this using the method of exhaustion, 
  chopping the parabolic region up into triangles and rearranging them
  cleverly.   It is a masterpiece of classical technique, and the 
  details are fairly intricate.  Now I want to show you a different
  way ... (using differentials)
  
  ... So now we have a purely technical question about differentials.
  What must (the area) *A* be so that *dA = 4x^2dx* ?  Instead of asking how to
  *d* (differentiate) something, we're asking how to un-*d* something!
  This is a major theme in mathematics.  Anything interesting enough to do
  is almost always interesting enought to undo. ...
  It turns out, contrary to the case of *d* itself, that there is no
  calculus for this.  That is, there does not (and cannot) exist a systematic,
  step-by-step procedure for determining the solution to a differential
  equation.  Which is not to say that there aren't many cases (including our
  present one) where we *can* succeed, just that there is no universal 
  formula for success. ...

  Luckily ... We can in fact solve the differential equation *dA = 4x^2dx*.
  ... Not only that, but I can even offer a general methodology for solving
  differential equations -- not one that will always (or even often) be
  successful, to be sure -- but here it is: *guessing*.  Not random, 
  out-of-the-blue guessing, but intelligent, conscientious guessing, 
  informed by experience and sensitivity to pattern. ..."
  (He then shows how he chooses an initial guess, then modifies it and checks
  it to get the solution *A = (4/3)x^3*)

  "... The big idea here is that geometry -- study of size and shape -- can be
  subsumed into the study of variables (also called *analysis*). ... The curious
  thing is why history went the way it did, and why the modern approach has 
  been so much more successful. ... Why, if these two viewpoints are equivalent,
  should one of them be so much more powerful and convenient?  There is no question
  that as visual animals we prefer a picture. ... But I know that when push comes to
  shove, the truth is in the details, and the details are in the number pattern.
  Of course, any analytic argument could be painstakingly translated into purely 
  geometric terms.  This tends, however, to produce very contorted and 
  artificial explanations in place of concise, almost too-simple-to-believe
  analytic arguments.

  I suppose what I'm really talking about here is modernism.  The exact 
  same issues -- abstraction, the study of pattern for its own sake, 
  and (sadly) the resulting alienation of the layperson -- are all present
  in modern art, music, and literature.  I would even venture to say that we
  mathematicians have gone the furthest in this direction ... Mathematics
  is the only true abstract art.  

  For me, the psychological fact of the matter is that however aesthetically
  and emotionally satisfying the geometric view may be, the analytic
  approach is, in the end, far more elegant and powerful."

10 Mar 2020

- *Mathematics: A Very Short Introduction* by Timothy Gowers (2002), preface,
  pages 14-16, 18-24, 86-103, 118-121, 124, 132-133 (no link): 
  "(Some readers find) the square root of minus one, the
  twenty-sixth dimension, and curved space (to be) disturbingly
  paradoxical.  It is possible to become comfortable with these ideas
  without immersing oneself in technicalities ... one should learn to
  think abstractly, because by doing so many philosophical
  difficulties simply disappear."

  "Suppose that you are designing a map ... You would like to use as
  few colors as possible, but do not wish to give two adjacent regions
  the same color.  Now suppose that you are drawing up the timetable
  for a university course.  Tne number of possible times for lectures
  is limited, so some modules will have to clash. ... (you) would like
  to choose the times in such a way that two modules clash only when
  there is nobody taking both.

  These two problems appear to be quite different, but an appropriate choice
  of model shows that from the mathematical point of view they are the same.
  In both cases there are some objects (countries, modules) to which something
  must be assigned (colors, times).  Some pairs of objects are incompatible
  (neighboring countries, modules that must not clash) in the sense that they
  are not allowed to receive the same assignment.  In neither problem do we 
  really care what the objects are ... so we may as well just represent them
  as points.  To show which pairs of points are incompatible we can link
  them with lines.  A collection of points, some of which are linked by lines,
  is a mathematical structure known as a graph. ... Once we have represented
  the problem in this way, our task in both cases is to divide the vertices
  into a small number of groups in such a way that no group contains two vertices
  linked by an edge. ... This illustrates another good reason for making models
  as simple as possible: If you are lucky, the same model can be used to study
  many different phenomena at once."

  "The abstract method in mathematics ... can be encapsulated by the following
  slogan: a mathematical object *is* what it *does*.  ... (The natural) numbers
  1,2,3,4,... are among the most basic of mathematical objects, but they do not
  seem to encourage us to think abstractly.  What, after all, could a number like
  5 be said to *do*? ... it seems to have an intrinsic nature, a sort of pure
  fiveness we immediately grasp ... (But) numbers do not have to be very large
  before we stop thinking of them as isolated objects and start to understand 
  them through their properties, through how they relate to other numbers, 
  through their role in a *number system*.  This is what I mean by what a 
  number 'does'.

  ... without some idea of arithmetic one could have only the vaguest grasp of
  a number like 1,000,017.  A number system is not just a collection of numbers
  but a collection of numbers together with rules for how to do arithmetic.
  Another way to summarize the abstract approach is to think about the rules 
  rather than the numbers themselves.  The numbers, from this point of view,
  are tokens in a sort of game ... To get some idea of what the rules are ...
  let me now list a few ... that we commonly use when adding and multiplying.
  The commutative law for addition: *a + b = b + a* ... (and several others).

  ... the idea of the number zero ... has seemed to many people to be a
  mysterious and paradoxical concept, inspiring questions such as: 'How can 
  something exist and yet be nothing?'  From the abstract point of view, 
  however, zero is very straightforward -- it is just a new token introduced
  into our number system with the following special property: *0 + a = a* "

  "Euclid ... was the first author to make systematic use of the axiomatic
  method, beginning his book with five axioms and deducing from them
  a large body of geometry theorems. ... The fifth axiom is equivalent to the
  so-called 'parallel postulate' which asserts that, given any line *L* and 
  any point *x* not lying on *L*, there is exactly one line *M* that goes
  through *x* and never meets *L*.  ... Historically, the axiom that caused
  the most suspicion, or at least uneasiness, was the parallel postulate.
  It is more complicated than the other axioms, and involves the infinite in
  a fundamental way. ... What (mathematicians) most wanted to do was deduce
  it from the other four axioms, thus showing that one could dispense with it.
  However, nobody managed to do so.

  You might wonder how one could ever hope to show that the parallel postulate
  does not follow from the rest of Euclid's axioms, if indeed it doesn't. ...
  This question has a beautiful answer ... Euclid's first four axioms were 
  devised to describe the geometry of an infinite, flat, two-dimensional space,
  but we are not obliged to interpret them that way, unless, of course, this 
  flatness actually follows from the axioms.  If we could somehow reinterpret
  (one might almost say 'misinterpret') the axioms by giving new meaning to 
  phrases such as 'line segment' ... and if when we had done so we found that
  the first four axioms were true but the parallel postulate was false, then we
  would have shown that the parallel postulate does not follow from the other
  axioms.  

  Why do we not just use spherical geometry as our reinterpretation?  ... 
  unfortuately, not all of the first four of Euclid's axioms are true in the
  sphere.  ... Therefore, I shall turn to another reinterpretation, called
  hyperbolic geometry ... hyperbolic geometry 
  satisfies the first four of Euclid's axioms. As for the parallel postulate,
  it is false for hyperbolic geometry, just as we had hoped.  ... in hyperbolic
  geometry we have exactly the alternative interpretation of the Euclidean 
  axioms that we were looking for in order to show that the parallel postulate 
  was not a consequence of the other four axioms."

  "A prime number is a whole number greater than one that is divisible
  by no other whole numbers ...  The (initial) prime numbers ... are
  2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 23, ... they appear to be somewhat randomly 
  distributed but not completely so. ... Given the sporadic, random-like
  quality of the primes, it is quite surprising how much can be proved 
  about them.  Interestingly, theorems about the primes are usually 
  proved by *exploiting* this seeming randomness.

  For example, ... Vinogradov proved ... that every large enough odd number
  can be written as the sum of three prime numbers.  I cannot explain in this
  book how he proved this, but what he did not do is find a *method* for 
  expressing odd numbers as sums of three primes.  
  Instead, ... he argued roughly as follows.   If you were to choose a 
  genuinely random sequence of numbers of about the same density as the 
  primes, then some elementary probability theory shows that you would 
  almost certainly be able to write all large enough numbers as the sum of
  three members of your sequence. ...

  Much research on prime numbers has this sort of flavor. ... It is interesting
  that the probabilistic model is a model not of a physical phenomenon,
  but of another piece of mathematics.  Although the prime numbers are 
  rigidly determined, they somehow feel like experimental data."

  "I well remember my shock when I first heard a mathematician declare 
  that the exact value of a certain quantity would never be known.  Now
  I am used to the fact that this is the rule rather than the exception.
  ... Instead, therefore, one tries to find upper and lower bounds. ..."

  "I implicitly drew a contrast between being technically fluent and 
  understanding difficult concepts, but it seems that almost everyone who
  is good at one is good at the other.  And indeed, if understanding a 
  mathematical object is largely a question of learning the rules it obeys
  rather than grasping its essence, then this is exactly what one would 
  expect -- the distinction between technical fluency and mathematical 
  understanding is less clear-cut than one might imagine.

  How should this observation influence classroom practice? ...
  For example, suppose that a pupil makes the common mistake of
  thinking that *x^(a+b) = x^a + x^b*.   A teacher who has emphasized
  the intrinsic meaning of expressions such as *x^a* 
  will point out that *x^(a+b)*
  means *a + b* *xs* all multiplied together.  Unfortunately, many
  children find this argument too complicated to take in, and anyhow
  it ceases to be valid if *a* and *b* are not positive integers.

  Such children might benefit from a more abstract approach. ...
  everything one needs to know about the powers can be deduced from
  a very few simple rules, of which the most important is
  *x^(a+b) = x^a x^b*.   If this rule has been emphasized, then not 
  only is the above mistake less likely ... it is also easier to correct.
  ... Of course, it is important to be familiar with basic facts
  such as that *x^3* means *x* times *x* times *x*, but these can be
  presented as consequences of the rules rather than as justifications
  for them."

  This book is not online but the author has some related essays here:
  https://www.dpmms.cam.ac.uk/~wtg10/vsipage.html

22 Feb 2020

- *Cosmic Profit* by Raymond Mungo (1980), pages 6 - 7 (no link): After describing
  his brief experience working for a scam rental agency in Seattle in
  the early 1970s: "Five months later, the agency disappeared, leaving
  its employees owed several weeks' back pay and its customers in the
  lurch.  Operations of its kind still exist in some United States cities.
  They are perfect examples to us that crime does pay if you're mean
  and stupid enough to victimize other people who trust you.
  The owners were paranoid, competitive, apparently miserable.
  They lived in hotel rooms out of suitcases, had no friends or families.
  They paid for their misdeeds in the extreme povery of their lives.
  They were the kind of guys who spend Christmas Day in a barroom.
  And they proved that some people try to get rich selling absolutely
  nothing at all."

22 Feb 2020

- *Essays: One* by Lydia Davis (2019), pages 171, 173-174, 188, 238, 
  253 (no link): From Revising One Sentence:
  "So there are many ways to justify writing in a notebook, a sentence
  that you may never use. ...  I follow my impulses in writing (in the 
  notebook) without asking whether what I am doing is sensible, efficient,
  even moral, etc.  I do it because I like to or want to -- which is where
  everything in writing should begin anyway. (As for the question of 
  morality -- I won't *publish* something if it seems to me morally
  wrong to publish it, but the act of exploration that is writing is
  very different from the finality and public-ness of publishing.
  Writing is still private until it is made public.)"

  "Speaking of not being afraid when you write, ... I have evolved ...
  two habits that make me not afraid.  One is the habit of starting
  every story in the notebook, where it is under no pressure to be a 
  story; the other is ... I sit in front of the typed pages of a story
  that is nearly finished ... and instead of working on it, I begin
  another story in my notebook ...  It is easier to do that -- to begin
  a story -- when it is not what I had planned to do. ... (I am) very
  relaxed and comfortable because there is a clear-cut task to go back
  to when I have nothing more to add, for the moment, to the new story.
  Meanwhile the typed story just sits there. ...  Sometimes I have 
  four or five, or more, stories in progress at once.  It is nice to feel
  that there is too much to work on rather than nothing at all --
  the blank page. ..."

  From Found Material, Syntax, Brevity ...: "This opening sentence
  is more than ten lines long ... to be exact and economical does 
  not necessarily mean to be brief. ..."

  From Thirty Recommendations for Good Writing Habits:
  " ... Read the best writers from all different periods; keep your 
  reading of contemporaries in proportion -- you do not want a steady
  diet of contemporary literature.  You already belong to your time."
  
  "Cutting can be effective ... But this does not mean that  everything 
  has to be short.  You can write three thousand pages (as Proust did in
  *In Search of Lost Time*) and still be economical.  In this case,
  being economical simply means not saying more than you need to."

12 Oct 2019

- Tales of Lost London by Laura Thompson, reviews of *The Memoirs of
  Ironfoot Jack* and *London Made Us* in *TLS*, Oct 4 2019, p. 25 (no link):
  "Do bohemians still exist? ... what defines the true bohemian is an attitude
  to money: a willingness to laugh in the face of that all-powerful god.
  Is this actually possible today?  In today's London it can seem as though the
  tiniest space, the most casual activity, has been seized and monetized, and
  the freedoms that breeze through Ironfoot's narrative have been squeezed to
  near-death.  This is the underlying theme of ... *London Made Us*, a book
  infused by the angry fear that money -- London's lifeblood -- has become
  more like a poison in its veins.

  ... (the author) adores Soho, or what Soho was. ... "Soho isn't a village",
  he rightly says, "it's an Alamo, a fortress under seige from the forces of
  conformity".  In fact the fight is probably lost, and the merry
  non-conformists "gone with the wind", in Ironfoot's phrase. ..."

2 Sep 2019

- http://thirdcoastpercussion.com//downloads/2015/04/Terry-Riley-In-C-concert2.pdf
  *In C* by Terry Riley, score and playing instructions.  Via
  https://www.metafilter.com/182890/Drums-Marimbas-Glockenspiel-Piccalo-Singing-Whistling-Drumming
  on *Drumming* by Steve Reich.

 6 Aug 2019

- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HT6MWtZLHe4 Moondog: Voices of Spring,
  arranged by Joanna MacGregor for the Britten Sifonia with Andy Sheppard
  (sax) Kuljit Bhamra (tabla/percussion) and others.
  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2xzR5Zk4T0c - Rabbit Hop
  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3Xvk5cuHpbs Heath on the Heather.
  And any other tracks from this album.

- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CG-GLkHG4C0 - Nancarrow: Study #21
  for Player Piano (Canon X)

15 Jun 2019

- Hauntings by Tom Graham, review of K-PUNK by Mark Fisher, *TLS*,
  May 24, 2019, p. 32 (no link): " ... it is hard to shake the feelihg that
  we are currently gripped by a retromania that stands in stark contrast to,
  say, the dynamic futurism of the 1960s or the early twentieth century.  ...
  Fisher contends that a principle reason for this imaginative decline is the
  "time poverty" engendered by late capitalism ... to the detriment of
  innovation, boredom itself has been has been radically transformed by the
  advent of digital media.  Today the slightest hint of restlessness or
  pocket of spare time tends to have us reaching for our smartphones --
  and yet the possiblity of real boredom, and the urgent desire to escape it,
  has historically acted as an important cultural catalyst. For punks in the
  1970s, the "dreary void of Sundays, the night hours after television stopped
  broadcasting, even the endless dragging minutes spent waiting in queues or
  for public transport" were viewed as a "challenge, an injunction and an
  opportunity".  Nowadays, "in the intensive 24/7 environment of capitalist
  cyberspace, the brain is no longer allowed any time to idle; instead, it is
  inundated with a seamless flow of low-level stimulus".  In compulsively
  engaging with frivolous online content that we recognize -- even
  celebrate -- as tedious, we sorely limit ourselves.  We have arrived at a
  situation in which "no one is bored, everything is boring" ..."

23 May 2019

- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=62tIvfP9A2w - The Most Feared Song in Jazz, Explained -
  "Making sense of John Coltrane's 'Giant Steps' ... It's known across the jazz world
  as one of the most challenging compositions to improvise over for two reasons -
  it's fast and it's in three keys. ... (here is)
  a crash course in music theory to help (us) understand this notoriously difficult song ..."

- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KNgA7dDs90E - The Greatest Album Covers of Jazz -
  "... bold typography, two tone photography, and minimal graphic design ...
  Blue Note captured the refined sophistication of jazz during the early 60s,
  particularly during the hard bop era, and gave it a definitive visual identity
  through album covers. ..."

- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iUr97kAtuAc - Jazz 625 At The BBC Live Concert Video -
  "... recorded in 1964 and '65, featuring the giants of the jazz scene, from Dizzy Gillespie
  to the Modern Jazz Quartet. This (YT video) is a good sampler of music from the show,
  but a few whole episodes are available online, and I've put links to the ones I found (here):"
  https://www.metafilter.com/180812/They-looked-so-great-when-they-played-Charlie-Watts
  for example https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3wkhyUl_Vmw - Bill Evans Trio - and
  https://vimeo.com/319508635 - Thelonius Monk

27 Apr 2019

- https://web.cs.ucdavis.edu/~devanbu/belief+evidence.pdf - Belief and
  Evidence in Empirical Software Engineering by Prem Devanbu, Thomas
  Zimmermann, and Christian Bird, *ICSE 16*, 2016: "The project of
  adapting belief to evidence is as old as science itself ... there is
  a systematic process by which ones prior beliefs are integrated
  with the data; this is the realm of statistical inference.  Two
  competing statistical inference methods are available: Frequentist
  and Bayesian.

  Frequentists assert that the probability of correctness of a theory
  should be indirectly (but exclusively) inferred from the frequency
  with which the consequents of the theory are observed in experiments
  ... This view is empirical, and entirely grounded on observation,
  and data, leaving no room for prior belief.  ... This way, of
  ignoring prior belief, and taking a neutral belief stance, is
  epistemically symmetric: all beliefs are considered equiprobable
  ... with all possible related hypotheses being considered equally
  likely before the experiment begins; and after the experiment is
  done, and the data is gathered, you can calculate the probability
  (p-value) of the observation, under each (a priori equiprobable)
  hypothesis, and reject the null hypothesis if it renders the data
  observation sufficiently improbable.

  In the Bayesian world-view, the prior belief regarding the
  hypothesis must be considered.  In an experimental setting, we
  ... interpret the data in the context of our prior belief, and then
  combine the prior belief with experimental data to yield an updated
  posterior belief.  Bayesians argue that is a more realistic view of
  how people actually react to evidence: we are more doubtful of
  outlandish claims, and ask for stronger evidence. ...

  The use of the frequentist p-value has recently come under attack,
  most prominently by (authors) with the publication of
  the alarmingly titled paper Why most published scientific results
  are wrong.  The paper notes that quite a number of very prominently
  reported scientific results turn out to be wrong, and are
  subsequently retracted. ...

  At the outset, we note that many of the (Bayseian) arguments are
  applicable in settings where experimental power (*viz*, the
  *unlikelihood* of a false negative finding) is limited by practical
  considerations, such as cost, effort, or the need for human
  subjects.  In ... big data settings ... sample sizes in the
  thousands ... afford formidable experimental power (even for effects
  that are statistically small) and also yield very low p-values
  (false positive rates).  This power allows experimental p-values to
  take a dominant role, and attenuate the effect of prior beliefs. ...

  (Bayesians) ... have argued that frequentist p-values are only one
  component of a rational approach to scientific knowledge.  ...  if
  one assumes that the prior probabilities of a hypothesis being true
  or false are not equal, and that the hypothesis is actually false,
  then simple experimental error (false positive rate, as well as
  false negative rate) leads to a higher rate of erroneous alternative
  hypothesis confirmation ("false discovery"), as given by (this formula).
  More concretely, if you give a hypothesis a 25% prior chance of
  being true, and even your false negative rate is vanishingly small,
  then with a pvalue of 0.05, there is an almost 13% risk of false
  discovery.  This can be viewed as a Bayesian account of the popular
  adage "extraordinary claims require extraordinary evidence"; the
  more extraordinary the claim, the lower the prior belief ..."

  via https://ask.metafilter.com/333495/Software-engineering-where-is-the-data -
  "I'm a programmer (and long-ago scientist) looking into software
  engineering best practices. As a field of scientific study, it
  seems... well, let's say, lean. ... What resources are there to
  catch up on what's going on in the field?"  Many answers follow with
  other links to empirical studies of software engineering.


27 Apr 2019

- https://sourcebooks.fordham.edu/basis/gregory-hist.asp#book2 - 
  *History of the Franks* by Gregory of Tours, translated by
  Ernest Brehaut.  Written before 594, about the invasions that ended
  Roman rule in Gaul and the Frankish kingdoms that replaced it.
  I think any reader would call this a dark age.  Book II begins:

  "Following the order of time we shall mingle together in our tale
  the miraculous doings of the saints and the slaughters of the
  nations.  I do not think that we shall be condemned thoughtlessly if
  we tell of the happy lives of the blessed together with the deaths
  of the wretched, since it is not the skill of the writer but the
  succession of times that has furnished this arrangement. ..."

  See also *The Ruin of Britain* by Gildas,
  https://blogs.bl.uk/digitisedmanuscripts/2019/06/gildas.html

31 Mar 2019

- *The Autobiography of Malcolm X* as told to Alex Haley (1965), 
  Chapter 11, Saved, pages 174-176, 183 (no link):
  "It had really begun, back in the Charlestown Prison, when Bimbi made me
  feel envy for his stock of knowledge. ... But any book I picked up had few
  sentences which didn't contain one to nearly all of the words that might
  have been in Chinese.  When I just skipped those words, of course, I really
  ended up with little idea of what the book said. ... 
  I saw that the best thing I could do was get hold
  of a dictionary.  ... that moved me to request a dictionary along with some
  tablets and pencils from the Norfolk Prison Colony school

  I'd never realized how many words existed! I didn't know *which* words I needed to learn.  
  Finally, just to start
  some kind of activity, I began copying.  In my slow, painstaking, ragged
  handwriting, I copied into that tablet everything printed on that first page ...
  I believe it took me a day.  ...  Then, aloud, I read back to myself, everything
  I'd written on the  tablet.  Over and over, aloud, to myself ...
  I woke up the next morning, thinking about those words -- immensely proud
  to realize not only that I had written so much at one time, but I'd written words
  that I never knew were in the world.  Moreover ... I could remember what many
  of these words meant. ...

  I was so fascinated that I went on -- I copied the dictionary's next page.
  ... With every succeedeing page, I also learned of people and places and events
  from history.  ... Finally the dictionary's A section had filled a whole tablet --
  and I went on into the B's.  That was the way I started copying what eventually
  became the entire dictionary. ... during the rest of my time in prison I would
  guess I wrote a million words.

  ... as my word-base broadened, I could for the first time pick up a book and
  read and now begin to understand what the book was saying.  Anyone who has
  read a great deal can imagine the new world that opened. ... from then until
  I left that prison, in every free moment I had, if I was not reading in the
  library, I was reading on my bunk. ... months passed without my even thinking
  about being imprisoned.  In fact, up to then, I had never been so truly free
  in my life.

  ... No university would ask any student to devour literature as I did when
  this new world opened up to me. ...
  I don't think anyone got more out of going to
  prison than I did.  In fact, prison enabled me to study far more
  intensively than I would have if my life had gone differently and I
  had attended some college. ... Where else but in a prison could I have
  attacked my ignorance by being able to study intensely sometimes as much
  as fifteen hours a day?"

  (Compare to Anthony Burgess and John McPhee below on reading the dictionary.)

20 Mar 2019

- *But Beautiful: A Book About Jazz* by Geoff Dyer (1991), pages 184-186, 188-189,
  192-193, 194-197, 197-198 (no link):
  personal, imaginative retellings of incidents from
  the lives of musicians: Lester Young, Thelonious Monk and others.
  From the much different omniscient Afterword:

  "... From the beginning (jazz) developed through the shared participation
  of a community of audiences and performers ... every time (a musician)
  picks up his horn, he cannot avoid commenting, automatically and implicitly
  ... on the tradition that has laid the music at his feet.  ...
  Ideally, a new version of an
  old song is virtually a recomposition and this labile relation between
  composition and improvisation is one of the sources of jazz's ability to
  constantly replenish itself. ...

  There are two apparently contradictory ways in which the antecedent's voice
  makes itself heard.
  Some musical personalities are so strong .. that they colonize
  a whole area of expression, and others can encroach on it only at the
  price of surrendering their individuality. ... It is now almost impossible
  for a trumpeter to play a ballad with a Harmon mute and not sound as if
  he is imitating Miles Davis.  Alternatively, there are
  rare instances of musicians assimilating their predominant influences to
  such an extent that they seem at times, as Harold Bloom has said of some
  poets, to "achieve a style that captures and oddly retains priority over
  their precursors ... and one can believe for startled moments, that they
  are being *imitated by their ancestors*." ... Lester Young frequently sounds
  as if he is indebted to those like Stan Getz who in fact owe their sound
  entirely to him.   At times early Keith Jarrett makes us wonder if
  Bill Evans does not sound too much like Jarrett.

  ... hand in hand with jazz's capacity to absorb its surrounding
  history goes its capacity to raise to the level of genius those who would
  otherwise have lacked a medium to express themselves. ... In what other
  art form could a man like Art Pepper have achieved the beauty he did?"

  Anyone who becomes interested in jazz is struck very early on by
  the high casualty rate among its practitioners. ... Virtually all
  black musicians were subject to racial discrimination and abuse. ...
  While (some) who dominated jazz in the 1930s ended up as alcoholics,
  the generation of musicians who forged the bebop revolution in the 1940s
  and consolidated its development in the 1950s fell victim to a virtual
  epidemic of heroin addiction.  Drug addiction led directly (in the cases
  of (some)) and indirectly (in the cases of (others)) to jail.  The routes
  to the psychiatric wards of hospitals, while a good deal more tortuous,
  was just as well trodden. ... (These) -- so many of the leading figures
  of the 1940s and 1950s suffered some kind of breakdown that it is only
  a slight exagerration of perspective to say that Bellevue has an almost
  equal claim to Birdland as being the home of modern jazz.

  Students of literature routinely find the early deaths of Shelley and Keats
  ... as fulfilling the doomed caveat of the Romantic agony. ...
  the suggestion is that premature death is a condition of creativity ...
  For jazz musicians of the bebop era making it into middle age begins to
  seem like a dream of longevity.  John Coltrane died at forty, Charlie
  Parker at thirty-four ... In a few cases their talent was so prodigious
  that at the time of their deaths some musicians had already produced an
  important body of work -- but even this consolidated achievement painfully
  emphasizes how much might have been accomplished in the years to come.
  Clifford Brown had already established himself as one of the greatest
  trumpeters of all time when he was killed in a car crash at age twenty-five
  ... when you consider that if Miles Davis had died at a similar age we would
  have nothing beyond *The Birth of the Cool*, some sense of the scale of the
  loss appears.

  If at first it seems melodromatic to suggest that there is something
  inherently dangerous in the form, a little consideration is likely
  leave us wondering how it could be otherwise.
  ... from the 1940s onward jazz advanced with the power and ferocity of a
  fire sweeping through a forest.   How could an art form have developed so
  rapidly and at such a pitch of excitement without exacting a huge human toll?
  If jazz has a vital connection with "the universal struggle of modern man"
  how could the men who create it not bear the scars of that struggle?"

10 Mar 2019

- http://www.cheng.staff.shef.ac.uk/morality/morality.pdf -
  Mathematics, Morally by Eugenia Cheng - "... The key characteristic
  about proof is not its infallibility, not its ability to convince
  but its *transferrability*. Proof is the best medium for
  communicating my argument to X in a way which will not be in danger
  of ambiguity, misunderstanding, or defeat. Proof is the pivot for
  getting from one person to another, but some translation is needed
  on both sides.  

  So when I read an article, I always hope that the author will have
  included a reason and not just a proof, in case I can convince
  myself of the result without having to go to all the trouble of
  reading the fiddly proof. When this does happen, the benefits are
  very great. But is it always possible? ..."

10 Mar 2019

- Ghosts and Psychic Dreams: The Dizzying Fiction of Anthony Burgess, by
  Margaret Drabble, *TLS*, Feb 22 2018, p. 3 (no link): "... Burgess suffered
  from ... an excessive love of words and language ... he cheerfully recommends
  "ransacking the dictionary" when in need of an inspirational boost.  Rejecting
  a critic who praised Shakespeare's dying delerium in his novel *Nothing Like the
  Sun* (1964) as "wrting of the highest order', he confesses, "Not quite so, really.
  I had taught myself the trick of contriving a satisfactory coda 
  by what, in music, is termed aleatory means: I flicked through the dictionary 
  and took whatever words leapt from the page.  I did this again at the end of my
  Napoleon novel: the effect is surrealistic, oceanic, and easily achieved".  This is 
  a very odd mode of composition.  Laura Sage nailed it in a review ... "Better the
  collective unwisdom of the verbal stew, he would say, than any tyrannous signature".
  ..."

17 Feb 2019

- *Out of Sheer Rage: Wrestling with D. H. Lawrence* by Geoff Dyer (1997), 
  pages 90, 137-138, 149, 152-153, 229, 231-232 (no link):
  "All the work of (Lawrence's) maturity was built on his
  relationship with Frieda. 'Fidelity to oneself means fidelity single and
  unchanging, to one other one.'  His adult life begins with the unalterable
  fact of his marriage. ...

  Films and books urge us to think that there will come certain moments in our
  lives when, if we can make some grand, once-in-a-lifetime gesture ...
  then we will be liberated, free.  Moments --
  crises -- like these are crucial to the cinema or theatre where psychological
  turmoil has to be externalized and compressed.  Dramatically speaking what
  happens after moments like these is unimportant even though the drama continues
  afterwards, with the consequences of these sudden lurches beyond the
  quotidian. ... Unless, like Thelma and Louise, you plunge off the side of a
  canyon, there is no escaping the everyday.  What Lawrence's life demonstrates
  so powerfully is that it actually takes a daily effort to be free.  To be free
  is not the result of a moment's decisive action but a project to be constantly
  renewed.  More than anything else, freedom requires tenaciousness.  There are
  intervals of repose but there will never come a state of definitive rest where
  you can give up because you have turned freedom into a permanent condition.
  Freedom is always precarious. ...

  What is surprising is to find that the parts of the correspondence of a great
  writer I most like are those which would be edited out if any kind of selection
  were made, i.e. those having nothing to do with his genius and everything to
  do with his ordinariness, with the ordinariness he claimed to loathe. The fact
  that Lawrence wrote *Lady Chatterly's Lover* means next to nothing to me; what
  matters is that he paid his way, settled his debts, made nice jam and 
  marmalade, and put up shelves.

  You see I've decided to butch it out, to go in the opposite direction
  to that suggested by yoga and meditation.  The yoga-meditation-zen path leads
  to peace with the world and oneness with the infinite.  Petty annoyances fade
  into insignificance, the ego dissolves, and you are left in a state of unruffled
  serenity and calm.  Or so I gather.  It's never worked for me.  Faced with the
  thousands of petty annoyances and grievances encountered in the course of a
  week ... (I'm) shaking my fist at the world.  I won't let even the smallest
  grievance escape me.  I'm going to seize on the most insignificant
  inconvenience, annoyance, hindrance, set-back, disappointment and am going
  to focus all my rage, anger, bitterness, and frustration on it. ...

  ... the alternatives to giving in and giving up are never as simple as they
  seem.  Believe me, I know.  I've devoted more of my life to thoughts of
  giving up than anyone else I can think of.  Nietzsche wrote that the thought
  of suicide had gotten him through many a bad night, and thinking of giving
  up is probably the one thing that's kept me going.  I think about it on a daily
  basis but always come up with the problem of what to do when I've given up.
  Give up one thing and you're immediately obliged to do something else.  The
  only way to give up totally is to kill yourself but that one act requires an
  assertion of will equal to the total amount that would be expended in the rest
  of a normal lifetime.  Killing yourself is not giving up, it's more like a
  catastrophic fast-forwarding. ...

  And there you have it.  One way or another we all have to write our studies
  of D. H. Lawrence.  Even if they will never be published, even if we will
  never complete them, even if all we are left with after years and years of
  effort is an unfinished, unfinishable record of how we failed to live up to
  our own earlier ambitions, still we all have to try to make some progress with
  our books about D. H. Lawrence.  The world over, from Taos to Taormina, from
  the places we have visited to countries we will never set foot in, the best
  we can do is to try to make some progress with our studies of D. H. Lawrence."

 9 Feb 2019

- http://jazz-quotes.com/ - "... I've begun collecting quotes from different books
  I have and from across the internet. ..."  For example:

  http://jazz-quotes.com/artist/miles-davis/  Miles Davis:

  "... you can't play everything at once!"

  "Sometimes you have to play a long time to be able to play like yourself."

  http://jazz-quotes.com/artist/thelonious-monk/  Thelonious Monk:

  "Just because you're not a drummer doesn't mean you don't have to keep time."

 4 Feb 2019

- *How to Write a Thesis* by Umberto Eco (1977), pages x, xxvi, 5-7, 9-10,
  110-111, 125, 142-144, 145, 149-150, 221 (no link). From the forward
  by Francesco Erspamer: "Umberto Eco takes us back to the original
  purpose of theses and dissertations ... They are not a test or exam,
  nor should they be.  They are not meant to show that the student did
  his or her homework.  Rather, they prove that students can *make*
  something out of their education."

  Eco: "... I became aware that many times over the course of my
  readings, I had attributed to others ideas that they had merely
  inspired me to look for; and many other times I remained convinced
  that an idea was mine until, after revisiting some books read many
  years before, I discovered that the idea, or its core, had come to
  me from a certain author. ... research is a mysterious adventure
  that inspires passion and holds many surprises.  Not just an
  individual but also an entire culture participates, as ideas
  sometimes travel freely, migrate, disappear, and reappear.  In this
  sense, ideas are similar to jokes that become better as each person
  tells them.

  As we shall see, the rigor of a thesis is more important that its
  scope.  One can even collect soccer trading cards with rigor
  ... There will always be a difference between his collection and the
  Louvre, but it is better to build a serious trading card collection
  ... than to create a cursory art collection.
  
  Writing a thesis requires a student to organize ideas and data, to
  work methodically, and to build an "object" that in principle will
  serve others.  ... If a student works rigorously, no topic is truly
  foolish, and the student can draw useful conclusions even from a
  remote or peripheral topic.

  In 1957 the great contemporary Italian critic Gianfranco Contini
  published a survey ... Had the survey been a thesis, it would have
  earned a failing grade ... Contini dedicated entire chapters to
  so-called "minor" authors and relegated certain "major" authors to
  mentions in short footnotes or omitted them altogether.  The
  committee would have attributed these choices to carelessness or
  ignorance.  Naturally, since Contini is a scholar of recognized
  historical knowledge and critical acumen, readers understood that
  the omissions and disproportions were intentional, and the absence
  of a particular author was a more eloquent expression of Contini's
  disfavor than a hostile review.  But if a student in his twenties
  plays the same trick, who guarantees that there is shrewdness behind
  his silence?  Do the omissions replace criticism that the student
  has written elsewhere, or that he *would be capable* of writing?

  The purpose of this fictitious introduction (fictitous, because you
  will rewrite it many times ...) is to allow you to give your ideas a
  primary direction that will not change ... If you cannot write the
  introduction, it means that you do not yet have clear ideas on how
  to begin. ... And it is precisely on the basis of this suspicion
  that you must write your introduction, as if it were a review of the
  already completed work. ... The goal of a good final introduction is
  to so satisfy and enlighten the reader that he does not need to read
  any further.  This is a paradox, but often a good introduction
  ... provides a reviewer with the right ideas, and prompts him to
  speak about the book as the author wished.

  Photocopies are indispensable instruments. ... But a set of
  photocopies can become an alibi.  A student makes hundreds of pages
  of photocopies and takes them home, and the manual labor he
  exercises in doing so gives him the impression that he possesses the
  work.  Owning the photocopies exempts the student from actually
  reading them.  This sort of vertigo of accumulation, a neocapitalism
  of information, happens to many.  Defend yourself from this trap: as
  soon as you have the photocopy, read and annotate it immediately.
  ... do not photocopy something new until you *own* (that is, before
  you have read and annotated) the previous set of photocopies.  There
  are many things that I *do not know* because I photocopied a text
  and then relaxed as if I had read it.

  ... *the best ideas may not come from the major authors.* This is
  academic humility: the knowledge that anyone can teach us something.
  ... The point is that we must listen with respect to anyone, without
  this exempting us from pronouncing our value judgments; or from the
  knowledge that the author's opinion is very different from ours, and
  that he is ideologically very distant from us.  But even the
  sternest opponent can suggest some ideas to us. ... I learned
  ... that if I wanted to do research, as a matter of principle I
  should not exclude any source.  This is what I call academic
  humility. ...

  ... it is a common belief that a popular work, where the topic is
  explained so that anyone can understand it, requires less skill than
  a specialized scientific report ... This is not completely
  true. ... usually works that do not explain the terms they use
  ... reveal authors who are more insecure than those who make every
  reference and every step explicit.  If you read the great scientists
  or the great critics, you will see that ... they are quite clear and
  are not ashamed of explaining things well.

  *You are not e. e. cummings.* ... he did all the things that an
  avant-garde poet can and should do.  But you are not an avant-garde
  poet.  Not even if your thesis is on avant-garde poetry. ... the
  language of the thesis is a *metalanguage*, that is, a language that
  speaks of other languages. ... From Dante to Eliot and from Eliot to
  Sanguineti, when an avant-garde poet wanted to talk about their
  poetry, they wrote in clear prose.  ... Are you a poet?  Then do not
  pursue a university degree.

  ... writing a thesis is like cooking a pig: nothing goes to waste.

 9-14 Jan 2019

- *Clear and Simple as the Truth: Writing Classical Prose* by
   Francis-Noel Thomas and Mark Turner (1994), pages 3 - 6, 13 - 14, 63, 81 -
   87 (no link): "The teaching of writing in America is almost
   entirely controlled by the view that teaching writing is teaching
   verbal skills ... Our answer is that writing is an intellectual
   activity, not a bundle of skills. ... any attempt to teach writing
   by teaching writing skills detached from underlying conceptual
   issues is doomed.

   But it is possible to learn to write by learning a style of
   writing.  We think conceptual stands are the basis of writing since
   they define styles. ... verbal artifacts -- like plumage -- help
   identify a style.  Nevertheless, in general, a style cannot be
   defined, analyzed, or learned as a matter of verbal choices.

   Writing is defined conceptually and leads to skills. ... But in no
   case is the activity constituted by the skills.  Great painters are
   often less skillful than mediocre painters; it is their concept of
   painting, not their skills, that defines their activity ...
   Intellectual activities generate skills, but skills do not generate
   intellectual activities.  The relationship is not symmetric.

   A style is defined by its conceptual stand on truth, presentation,
   writer, reader, thought, language, and their relationships.
   Classic style ... adopts the stance that its purpose is
   presentation; its motive, disinterested truth.  Successful
   presentation consists of aligning language with truth, and the test
   of this alignment is clarity and simplicity.  The idea that
   presentation is successful when language is aligned with truth
   implies that truth can be known; truth needs no argument but only
   accurate presentation; the reader is competent to recognize truth;
   the symmetry between writer and reader allows the presentation to
   follow the model of conversation; a natural language is sufficient
   to express truth; and the writer knows the truth before he puts it
   into language.

   ... Once adapted, the classic stand offers a general style of
   presentation suitable to any subject whatever. ... The style does
   not limit the writer's subject matter or efface his individuality,
   but the writer's individuality will be expressed principally by his
   knowledge of his subject.

   ... We coach our readers in the conceptual stand that might turn
   them into classical writers, and contrast the classic stand with
   some others: reflexive, practical, plain, contemplative, romantic,
   prophetic, oratorical."

   "Classic style is focused and assured.  Its virtues ... are its
   vices.  It declines to acknowledge ambiguities, unessential
   qualifications, doubts, or other styles ... writing in this style
   requires no commitment to a set of beliefs, only a willingness to
   adopt a role for a limited time and a specific purpose.  The role
   is severely limited because ... The human condition does not, in
   general, allow the degree of autonomy and certainty that the
   classic writer pretends to have.  ... The insousiance required to
   ignore what everyone knows and to carry the reader along in this
   style cannot be maintained for very long, and the masters of the
   style always know its limits.  The classic distance is a sprint."

   "Abstractions can be clear and exact.  From the classic viewpoint,
   the distinction between abstract and concrete has no consequence.
   ... What matters is not the ontological category of the subject but
   rather the style in which it is conceived. ... in classic style,
   the human soul can be conceived as clearly and exactly as the tree
   in front of your face. ..."

   "Classical style is not practical style.  In the model scene behind
   the practical style, the reader has a problem to solve ... a job to
   do. ... in this scene, writing is an instrument for delivering
   information with the maximum efficiency and in such a way as to
   place the smallest possible burden on the reader ...  The best
   known teachers of practical style are Strunk and White, in their
   ubiquitous *Elements of Style*.  The best teachers of practical
   style are Joseph Williams and Gregory Colomb, in Williams's *Style:
   Toward Clarity and Grace* ... (that book) is missing only one thing: namely,
   an explicit acknowledgment of its fundamental stand, and
   acknowledgment that its fundamental stand is one of many
   alternatives. ... In the model scene of practical style, readers
   and writers hold standard job slots in existing institutions.
   ... practical style serves the purpose of keeping the information
   flowing efficiently through institutions. ...  There is a surface
   mark of practical style ... (it) permits skimming ... you can
   simply glance through and extract what you want.  If you try to
   skim classic writing in this way, you run the risk of missing
   indispensable nuances or refinements. ..."

12 Nov 2018

- *Draft No. 4: John McPhee On the Writing Process* (2017), pages
   19-20, 158-160, 162 (no link): "It doesn't matter that something
   you've done before worked out well.  Your last piece is never going
   to write your next one for you.  Square 1 does not become Square 2,
   just Square 1 squared and cubed."

   "You can build a structure in a such a way that it causes people to
   to want to keep turning pages.  A compelling structure in
   nonfiction can have an attracting effect analogous to a story line
   in fiction."

   "If your prose seems stillborn and you completely lack confidence,
   you might be a writer.  ... if you tell people "you just love to
   write," you may be delusional. ...  First drafts are slow and
   develop clumsily ... That four-to-one ratio in writing time --
   first draft versus all the other drafts combined -- has for me been
   consistent in projects of any length ... The hardest part comes
   first, getting something -- anything -- out in front of
   me. ... With that, you have achieved a sort of nucleus ... you may
   be actually writing only two or three hours a day, but your mind
   ... is working on it twenty-four hours a day ... but only if some
   sort of draft or earlier version aleady exists.  Until it exists,
   writing has not really begun."

   "You draw a box around not only around any word that does not seem
   quite right but also around words that fulfill their assignment but
   seem to present an opportunity.  ... If there's a box around
   "sensitive" ... try "susceptible".  Why "susceptible?  Because you
   looked up "sensitive" in the dictionary and it said "highly
   susceptible."  With dictionaries, I spend a great deal more time
   looking up words I know than words I have never heard of -- at
   least ninety-nine to one.  The dictionary definitions of words you
   are trying to replace are far more likely to help out than a
   scattershot wad from a thesaurus."

10 Nov 2018

- https://www.metafilter.com/177575/Violin-Sonatas-etc - Links to more
  than fifty performances of sonatas for violin, viola, cello, and
  double bass, listed in chronological order from Mozart to Philip
  Glass.  With even more links from commenters, including some earlier
  baroque pieces.

27 Oct 2018 

- http://thequietus.com/articles/25409-richard-thompson-interview-favourite-albums?page=4 - 
  Thompson talks about 13 favorite records including ... Moby Grape
  !?  "They were the most interesting band that came out of the San
  Francisco scene in the late 60s. They seemed less out of it, more
  focused, and less noodly than some of the others. It's a record that
  gets forgotten a bit, this one, but it's full of fantastic songs and
  really well played, with a great guitarist in Jerry Miller. ..."

- https://jjon.github.io/Old-GooglePlus-Posts/ - Recommendations from
  an eclectic musician, with links to recordings etc.  No-nonsense
  list he recently rescued from the discontinued
  https://plus.google.com/u/0/collection/0T0sDB

19 Oct 2018

- http://calculusmadeeasy.org/ - *Calculus Made Easy* by Silvanus
  P. Thompson (1910) - "The text is based on the PDF version from
  Project Gutenberg converted to html by hand." That is,
  http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/33283

 6 Oct 2018

- *Uncommon People: The Rise and Fall of the Rock Stars*, David
  Hepworth (2017), pages 2, 69, 280, 281 (no link): "Rock stars were
  the product of an age when music was hard to access and was
  treasured accordingly. ... This was in the days when any records,
  but particularly imported American blues records, were such objects
  of desire that enthusiasts would ofen embark on inconvenient
  cross-town trips involving changing buses to visit somebody's house
  where there was rumored to be a copy of some particular gem; once
  there, they would play both sides again and again, staring
  hypnotized at the spinning labels until both sight and sound had
  been seared into memory. ... 

  (The rock star) made his name in the vanished world of records you could
  hold in your hand. ... which we had secured by using all our available
  cash in one particular week, a record that would, for a while at least,
  be the most precious thing we owned.  ...

  We now live in a world of unlimited supply and exhausted demand.  Music
  can be every bit as good now as it used to be.  However, it can never be
  as precious as it used to be.  It doesn't have our undivided attention
  any longer. ... Now that we have easy access to everything, the
  individual atoms that make up that everything are less significant in
  themselves.  The same applies to the people associated with those atoms.
  That's why we don't have rock stars anymore."

30 Sep 2018

- *The Art of Fiction* by John Gardner (1983), Ch 6 Technique, p.
  127 (no link) - "Writing an exercise, the beginning writer is doing
  exactly what the professional does most of the time.  Much of what
  goes into a real story or novel goes in not because the writer
  desperately wants it there but because he needs it: The scene
  justifies some later action, shows some basis of motivation, or
  reveals some aspect of character without which the projected climax
  of the action would not seem credible. ..."  According to the book,
  this is the one way in which creative writing is like programming.
  In every other way it is completely different.
   
16 Sep 2018

- https://arxiv.org/abs/1809.01639 - Making Better Sense of Quantum
  Mechanics by N. David Mermin - "It once made sense to exclude the
  scientist from scientific explanations of the physical world. This
  warded off superstitious, animistic, or religious explanations. But
  ... today it makes sense to insist that the scientist should not be
  excluded from a philosophical understanding of the nature of
  scientific explanation. ... the historic exclusion of the user,
  while it may have helped get science off the ground, is today
  responsible not only for the confusion at the foundations of quantum
  mechanics, but also for a broader misunderstanding of the nature of
  science in general."  

  In addition to this argument, much of the value here is in the review of
  the opinions of many physicists and others, expressed in their own words
  (via quotations).  But this paper didn't resolve any quantum mysteries
  for me.

 9 Sep 2018

- https://www.theatlantic.com/entertainment/archive/2018/07/a-writers-fixation-on-sound/565904/ - R. O. Kwon on Writing *The Incendiaries* - "I worked for 10 years
  on my first book. ... I couldnt feel done with my novel until I
  could pick it up, read a line, and not desperately want to change
  all the words.  ...  I spent two whole years just reworking the
  first 20 pages over and over again. By the end, I had the most
  reworked, totally inert pages Ive ever seen in my life. It was just
  going nowhere. ... (Lauren Groff suggested) The idea is to get
  through early drafts as quickly as possible. ... I wrote whole
  drafts by hand. Then I wrote using a program that acts just like a
  typewriter: You can backspace once, but cant cut and paste full
  paragraphs, and can only move forward. Then, in Word, I wrote a
  draft in which, every time I finished a paragraph, I turned the font
  white so I couldnt see it and mess with it anymore. ... Theres no
  reason to do all that careful line-edit work when Im still making
  basic character and structural changes. ... As I continue, and start
  to focus more on sound ... I do a lot of reading out loud to help me
  determine whether the sound is working. ... When Im finding joy in
  a paragraph, theres really no sentence where Im getting bored."

  "I keep a giant, running document of bits and pieces from books I
  love. ... When I feel confused and lost ... I just go back to the
  document and start reading.  ... I think theres never been a time
  when that hasnt sparked something in me, and given me an idea or a
  thought that can bring me back to my own writing ..."

- https://www.metafilter.com/176413/Time-for-some-classical-music -
  Eclectic suggestions by many ordinary music lovers, with links,
  responding to these recommendations from nineteen composers,
  musicians, and critics:
  https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/06/arts/music/5-minutes-that-will-make-you-love-classical-music.html
  Also,
  https://ask.metafilter.com/326239/Please-recommend-me-many-requiems-music-books-movies-anything

26 Aug 2018 

- https://arxiv.org/abs/1807.08416 - Some Fundamental Theorems in
  Mathematics by Oliver Knill - Linked PDF is a survey of modern math
  in 133 pages, in the form of the "fundamental" theorem in each of
  135 areas, all in the first 62 pages!  Followed by a rationale and
  an explanation of "fundamental", by thirteen two-page lecture
  summaries on key topics, by Twitter math: forty-two 140-character
  statements of theorems with proof summaries, and more. "Teaching a
  course called Math from a historical perspective at the Harvard
  extension school led me to write up the present document. ... Im
  reporting on many of these theorems as a tourist and not as a
  local."

 7 Aug 2018 

- https://believermag.com/broken-time/ - Broken Time: Nardis and the
  Curious History of a Jazz Obsession - "Though superb versions of
  Nardis have been recorded by everyone ... no one embodied its
  melodic potential more than Bill Evans. ..." much about Evans, some
  about Ralph Towner and Richard Beirach, bits about Miles Davis and
  several more. Via https://www.metafilter.com/175776/Broken-Time
  which also links to https://www.jmeshel.com/124-bill-evans-nardis/
  with 19 different recordings by Bill Evans, and also via
  https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=17684477 with links to more
  performances by Evans, Towner, and guitarist Antoine Boyer. 
  Evans talks about music between playing with the trio at this house
  concert in Helsinki in 1970: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C0AcvMBPuZI

16 Jul 2018

- https://www.cs.utexas.edu/~EWD/transcriptions/EWD10xx/EWD1012.html -
  "Roughly speaking, there are two ways in which people try to reason
  about programs; I shall distinguish them as the postulational
  method and the operational method. ... The tragedy of today's
  world of programming is that, to the extent that it reasons about
  programs at all, it does so almost exclusively operationally. ..."
  Don't miss the version in Dijkstra's handwriting at
  https://www.cs.utexas.edu/~EWD/ewd10xx/EWD1012.PDF See also
  https://www.cs.utexas.edu/~EWD/transcriptions/EWD10xx/EWD1073.html
  (or .pdf) for some short examples of mathematics in the form he
  advocates.  See
  https://www.cs.utexas.edu/~EWD/transcriptions/EWD13xx/EWD1300.html
  for a lengthy rationale for this form.  Much much more at
  https://www.cs.utexas.edu/~EWD/welcome.html

- http://www.ams.org/notices/201201/rtx120100031p.pdf - A Revolution
  in Mathematics? by Frank Quinn.  Similar argument to EWD1012 above,
  but from a mathematician, not a computer scientist. "The physical
  sciences all went through 'revolutions': wrenching transitions in
  which methods changed radically and became much more powerful.  It
  is not widely realized, but there was a similar transition in
  mathematics between about 1890 and 1930. ... The strangest
  difference is that the scientific revolutions were highly visible,
  while the significance of the mathematical event is essentially
  unrecognized. ..."

22 May 2018

- https://www.metafilter.com/174248/A-plethora-of-Sun-Ras-four-decades-of-baffling-dazzling-mystical-jazz
  Long annotated discography and links to performances at YouTube and
  Bandcamp.  Defies description or summarization.

- http://www.ubuweb.com/ UbuWeb.  "All avant-garde.  All the time."
  One of many many pages is http://www.ubu.com/emr/ Electronic Music
  Resources: "We've taken the filing cabinet as our model, rather
  than the museum, and our focus is on historical and rare material
  rather than recent developments."  Interesting austere page design.

 9 May 2018

- https://www.metafilter.com/174029/Sextets-septets-octets-nonets
  "Stepping beyond the more familiar three-, four- and five-piece
  line-ups, there is a wealth of classical music out there composed
  for slightly bigger bands. ... a small selection of which can be
  found via the links within..."  Also links to:
  https://www.metafilter.com/166863/Piano-violin-and-cello
  https://www.metafilter.com/163338/String-Quartets
  https://www.metafilter.com/170478/Piano-Quintets
1
6 Apr 2018

- http://www.vulture.com/article/100-most-influential-pages-comic-book-history.html - "We have set out to trace the evolution of American comics by
  looking at 100 pages that altered the course of the fields
  history." From 1929 to 2014.

15 Apr 2018

- https://www.metafilter.com/173509/Take-me-for-a-walk-in-the-morning-dew-my-honey - "Morning Dew is a post-nuclear protest song, written in 1961 by
  Canadian Bonnie Dobson ... the power of the song is evidenced by
  the vast number of covers over the years."  History,
  recollections, links to many versions.

22 Mar 2018

- http://invislib.blogspot.com/2008/08/t.html - "The Invisible Library
  ... catalog of books that exist only within other books", including
  "TRAPNEL, X. (Frances Xavier): Bin Ends, Camel Ride to the Tomb,
  Dogs Have No Uncles, Profiles in String  from Anthony Powell's A
  Dance to the Music of Time"

- http://www.bachrewrite.com/en/ - "Bach played on electric pianos ...
  the point was the combination of a period-instrument orchestra with
  the sound of the Wurlitzer and Rhodes, which  perversely  should
  now also be treated as historical instruments."  Interesting
  black-and-white page design and photography.

16 Mar 2018

- https://standardebooks.org/about/ - "The Standard Ebooks project
  differs from those etext projects (Gutenberg, Archive) in that we
  aim to make free public domain ebooks that are carefully typeset,
  cleaned of ancient and irrelevant ephemera, take full advantage of
  modern ereading technology, are formatted according to a detailed
  style guide, and that are each held to a standard of quality and
  internal consistency."

 7 Mar 2018

- https://ask.metafilter.com/319841/Classical-music-desert-island-playlistfor-the-Isle-of-the-Dead
  "I am on a hunt for little or lesser-known classical music that
  invokes disquiet or suspense in the listener."  Many many responses.
  "These are fabulous suggestions! I have slowly been working my way
  through this list..."

 4 Mar 2018

- https://ask.metafilter.com/319733/Classical-Music-looking-for-contrasting-performances-of-the-same-piece
  "recommendations from some classical music heads of two or more
  performances of the same piece, both which differ from each other
  and are good (or great) versions of the composition they're
  representing."  Soon followed by this, "inspired by a Mefi comment":
  https://ask.metafilter.com/319738/Music-that-gives-you-chills
  "... music that has a real emotional and physiological effect like
  this, that makes your heart go faster and catches your breath. ...
  music that give you chills down your spine and bring tears to your
  eyes. Music that leaves you breathless."

 8 Jan 2018

- https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4522609/ "Fifty
  psychological and psychiatric terms to avoid: a list of inaccurate,
  misleading, misused, ambiguous, and logically confused words and
  phrases" "a provisional list of 50 commonly used terms in
  psychology, psychiatry, and allied fields that should be avoided, or
  at most used sparingly and with explicit caveats. We provide
  corrective information for students, instructors, and researchers"

22 Dec 2017

- https://www.metafilter.com/171362/All-I-want-for-Christmas-is-a-crapton-of-jazz
  links to jazz Christmas music

20 Dec 2017

- https://www.metafilter.com/171286/Well-you-neednt-listen-But-you-should
  Links about Thelonious Monk, links to his music by himself and others.

- https://www.metafilter.com/142742/Nica - Links about Kathleen Annie
  Pannonica Rothschild, patroness of jazz, especially Monk.  Also
  links to Monk's music.

17 Dec 2017

- http://www.inbflat.net/ http://www.inbflat.net/faq.html
  In Bb, a collaborative music and spoken word project, 
  partly inspired by Terry Riley's In C.
  https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=15941838

13 Nov 2017

- https://vimeo.com/89837165 - John Coltrane 'A Love Supreme' only
   live performance July 26, 1965 - only 14 minutes.  via
   http://www.metafilter.com/170480/July-26-1965-A-Love-Supreme-Live

 3 Oct 2017

- https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2013/01/14/structure - Structure,
  by John McPhee, on his use of the KEdit editor.

19 Jul 2017

- http://ask.metafilter.com/311380/Other-jazz-standards-like-these-jazz-standards
  many heartfelt recommendations for an aspiring pianist, with links
  to youtube for many many standards
  (links.html 21 Jul 2017)

9 Dec 2016

- www.rle.mit.edu/rgallager/documents/BooleShannon.pdf - Claude
  Shannon's methods and accomplishments, lecture by Robert Gallager:
  "Shannon's genius lay in finding the "right way", the "simple way"
  to look at everyday technical problems" "Searching for simplicity is
  really searching for intuitive understanding of a simplified version
  of the problem that doesn't ignore the underlying original issues"
  "Graduate students often mistake simplicity for triviality .. The
  misconception is that it takes the best students to solve the most
  complex problems.  Actually, it takes the best students to *find*
  the simplest open problems."

