outtakes.txt - considered but rejected for recent.txt

22 Jul 2021

- From Annette Groschner's essay about gentrification and eviction,
  quoted in From Checkpoint Charlie: Essays on Europe's youth capital,
  by Jane Yeager, review of *The Passenger: Berlin* in *TLS*, July 16,
  2021, p. 11 (no link):

  "I am a renter out of conviction, and it is a fact that Berlin is a 
  city for renters that has always made it such a great place to live.
  I feel this way not just because of the obligations that property brings,
  but because of what acquiring property through credit does to people --
  it makes cowards of them.  The fear of losing jobs or orders and then no
  longer being able to service their loans causes them to put up with anything
  -- or worse, to use the fact that they own a property as a basis on which 
  to make demands on the city and on their neighbors."

21 Jul 2021 

- Pacifist, soldier, mystic, saint: the complex identity of Simone Weil
  by Karen Olsson, review of *The Subversive Simon Weil, A Life in Five
  Ideas* by Robert Zaretsky in *TLS*, July 16, 2021, p. 8 - 9 (no link):

  "As a Parisian teenager in the 1920s, Weil fell into a depression, 
  convinced that she would never reach the kind of intellectual heights
  to which her brother, the mathematician Andre Weil, had access. She
  recovered by way of an epiphany, deciding that as long as she devoted 
  herself to the search for truth, to the cultivating of rigourous attention,
  her life had value.

  ... While others on the left argued and wrote about labour, ... she took
  a job in a factory, where she discovered the deadening toil that labourers
  actually undertook.  This in turn reorientated her politics, as she
  understood that technology itself had come to dictate the arrangement of
  society -- one that enslaved workers.
  
  What enslaved them was not just the drudgery, but the way in which such
  work made it hard even to think. For Weil clear thinking was a necessary
  precursor to any genuine political resistance: "as thinking creatures we 
  are incapable of accepting servitude", Zaretsky summarizes.  And the 
  importance of intellectual engagement, of wrestling with the truth, went
  well beyond politics.  She prized the understanding that comes from letting
  go of the self and extending one's full attention to something or someone
  else.  As time went on, the ideal became more explicitly spiritual."

 7 Aug 2018

- https://medium.com/cent-official/cent-income-from-anywhere-519515b396d8
  "... it’s odd that Facebook is valued at over $400B while nearly all
  users of the platform make $0 for producing its content. ... The
  ultimate vision for Cent is to become an income source for anyone
  who wants to provide their value to society via a digital network."
  Prototype at https://beta.cent.co/ Promotion at https://www.cent.co/
  Via https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=17694135 "... paying users
  for providing responses that are no different than FB posts or
  Tweets. The difference between Cent and FB and Twitter though is
  that users on Cent are responding to posts that have a monetary
  bounty attached to them..."  

  Interesting idea, but poor implementation with a weird community.
  The tweet format does not lend itself to high-value content -- most
  tweets are worthless.  Much of the activity at the prototype site is
  chitchat from enthusiasts for cryptocurrencies and blockchain.
  According to https://beta.cent.co/leaderboard, the top earner made
  $36.99 in 30 days.  Compare to much higher quality questions,
  answers, and site design at https://ask.metafilter.com/

