 <!- Draft possibly to be added to commonplace book after additions or edits ->
 2 Nov 2023

- *Thirteen Ways of Looking at the Novel* by Jane Smiley, 2005 (no link) -

  From Chapter 2, What is a Novel?, pages 14, 22 - 26:
 
  "A novel is a (1) *lengthy*, (2) *written*, (3) *prose*, (4) *narrative*
  with a (5) *protagonist*.  Everything that the novel is and does, and
  every effect the novel has had on, first, Western Culture, and subsequently,
  world culture, grows out of these five small facts that apply to every
  novel. 

  Because a novel is a printed book ... It retains its purity and constitutes  a direct communication from one person to another.   A reader who doesn't   like what an author has to say may close it, burn it, recommend against  it, give it a bad review in a publication, or even censor it, but she   doesn't thereby destroy it, as she would if she simply retold the story,  leaving out the objectionable parts or adding a little bit of sentiment
  or clarification here and there.  A novel is known to be a book.  A  redaction of a novel, by Hollywood or Broadway or *Reader's Digest* or   a paraphrase or any other means, is known not to be a novel, not to be  authentic.   A novel can be dropped or outmoded or rediscovered by readers,  but it can't be changed into something else, in the way that the stories  that were bases of epic poems or traditional folktales were changed in   the telling.   

  The protagonist, made accessible by prose and interesting by narrative
  and familiar by length ... has entered the lives and minds of millions
  and recreated them, at least a bit, in his or her own image.  ...
  A protagonist is usually interesting not because he is someone special ...
  but because something happens to him.  ...  This typical transformation from
  an ordinary person to someone worth remembering comes to seem both
  routine and appealing, encouraging readers to see themselves as 
  potentially interesting and their lives as potential material for novels.
  Thus are the moral lives of readers encouraged to develop complexity ...

  But the most important essential characteristic of the novel that arises
  out of its structure, out of the combination of narrative and length, 
  is that it is inherently political. ... a novel -- a story that runs a 
  hundred pages or longer -- must for the sake of context and variety 
  include other characters ... so even as a mere filling in the blanks, the
  author begins to depict the group that the protagonist is part of.
  As the group takes shape, so the protagonist takes shape. ... as the 
  details mount up, so does the requirement that the author have a theory of
  individuals and groups.   The narrative, and therefore the logic, of the
  protagonist's relationship to the group must express some explicit or
  implicit theory, and inevitably many of these theories are political, 
  because politics is about the division of power in human groups.  ...

  And not only is the novel inherently political, it is inherently liberal
  -- that is, it embraces the rights and obligations of individualism.  This
  is easy to understand as soon as we realize that a lengthy prose narrative
  must be well organized to be readable.   A novel's organization depends upon
  distinct and readily identifiable characters. ... Thus, purely for the sake
  of organization, the novel promotes the idea of individuals having
  memorable idiosyncrasies and importance.  As a result, it appeals to the
  reader's sense of her own distinctiveness and importance. ... In a society
  that promotes conformity, novel-reading -- one person experiencing both
  the mind of another person and her own mind experiencing -- is a 
  subversive force.

  The novel is inherently political, but the organizational demands of the
  novel form mean that it doesn't fit easily into political ideas of class
  or group blame or virtue.  Every important character in a novel is 
  portrayed has having moral complexity.  If a character is solely evil, or
  is solety a victim, then he or she is a symbol of something but not a 
  protagonist, not possessed of agency, which in a novel is the only standard
  of real importance.  A protagonist in a novel, of whatever ethnic 
  background and in whatever time period, cannot be wholly good or wholly bad
  and still be interesting enough to read about. ... Consequently, readers
  with an essential political agenda, looking for models of proper thinking
  and behavior, are hardly ever going to find them in novels. ..."

  From Chapter 6, Morality and the Novel, pages 118 - 122:

  "In the nineteenth century the theory of evil changed, which changed the
  nature of morality in the novel, and therefore the portrayal of brutes,
  criminals, and psychopaths. ...

  It seems that Charles Dickens, the most influential English author of the
  nineteenth century, was generally drawn to criminals and pyschopaths.
  ... Dicken's gift for empathy with sociopathic personalities constitutes
  a philosophy that has had enormous effect on how modern people understand
  evil as a form of logic, and even of madness that is internally consistent,
  unrecognized as evil by the perpetrator, and compelling.  By the end of his
  career, Dickens was as good as anyone who has ever lived at clarifying the
  motivations of those who harm others.

  ... Even when Dicken's psychological theories don't hold water, the idea of
  cause and effect, the idea that there can be a theory of evil (and 
  goodness), does.  As early as *Oliver Twist*, Dickens is laying out a
  how-to manual for making criminals. ... It is a very short step from this
  sort of causal logic to the advocacy of political and social solutions for
  what had always been considered individual moral failings, and Dickens
  readily made it.

  What nineteenth-century novelists discovered was that the exploration of
  cause and effect that is natural to the novel mitigates the idea that 
  evil is random ... both the author and the reader start to feel that evil
  can be fixed, and fixed by amateurs ...  

  The novel has certain inherent characteristics -- it is naturally 
  democratic; it promotes individuality and freedom; it is intimate and
  social and connective; it elevates inner life over appearance; it is,
  often in spite of itself, hopeful; and it is naturally popular.  These
  qualities fit into and exemplify the idea of the modern liberal society
  and in the course of the nineteenth century came to be seen as moral
  issues. ...

  The great conflict of the twentieth century concerned whether morality was
  made up of a set of personal choices having to do with right and wrong
  behavior, as described by, say, the Ten Commandments, or whether it was 
  made up of a set of political choices having to do with the inequitable
  distribution and abuse of power and wealth.   All sorts of social and 
  economic institutions that had once been considered more or less the natural
  order of things became moral dilemmas (and zones of ideological conflict)
  -- slavery, marriage and domestic abuse, child labor, the rewards of 
  capital versus the rewards of labor, genocide in war or as an act of
  conquest, exploitation and destruction of natural resources, the 
  impoverishment of the human spirit as an effect of labyrinthine and 
  secretive bureaucracy.   

  The novel promoted this moral shift. The novel as a form is usually seen
  to be moral if its readers consider freedom, individuality, democracy,
  privacy, social connection, tolerance, and hope to be morally good,
  but it is not considered moral if the highest values of a society are
  adherence to rules and traditional mores, the maintenance of hierarchical
  relationships, and absolute ideas of right and wrong.   Any society based
  on the latter will find novels inherently immoral and subversive."
  
  From Chapter 8, The Novel and History, pages 173 - 177:

  "In the course of 650 years, Boccaccio and his successors have helped to
  create a certain kind of world.  It is a world not unlike the novel ...
  In this world everyone, male or female, could become, might be, his or her
  own protagonist ... In this world individual existence has the potential for
  meaning -- it can be understood and possibly changed ... Cause and effect
  can be disentangled and observed ... In this world the ordinary person 
  can step back, observe both the world and himself or herself, make a 
  judgment, and then make a choice ...

  ... the world I thought was established and secure, at least
  in the West, is more fragile than I thought, because it is newer than I
  realized.  That a woman could be an agent rather than an object or a
  possession, that a marriage can be chosen, then rejected, that an identity
  can be constructed by an ordinary person -- these are difficult ideas, 
  strange to many, and dangerous to some.   The tension between the 
  individual and the group that the novel depicts is ofen intolerable to 
  the group, and for some groups, an individual does not have a right to 
  a point of view.  The routine quality of the novel, the way that novels
  seem ubiquitous and benign, pleasurable, or fun, or even tedious to 
  schoolchildren, masks their subversiveness and helps us forget how they
  have remade the world. ...

  Pride, arrogance, moral blindness, and narcissism are endemic among 
  humans, especially humans who occupy positions of power, either in society
  or in the family.  But when I have read a long novel, when I have entered
  systematically into a sensibility that is alien to mine, the author's or 
  a character's, when I have become interested in another person because he
  is interesting, not because he is privileged or great, there is a possibility
  that at the end I will be a degree less self-centered than I was at the
  beginning, that I will be a degree more able to see the world as another
  sees it.  And there is a possibity that I will be able to reason about my
  own emotions.   In the end I will be more empathetic ... and I will be 
  more sympathetic ...

  When we talk about the death of the novel, what we are really talking
  about is the possibility that empathy, however minimal, would no longer
  be attainable by those for whom the novel has died. ... If the novel has
  died for men ... then the inner lives of their friends and family 
  members are a degree more closed to them than before.  If the novel dies,
  or never lives, for children and teenagers who spend their time watching
  TV or playing video games, then they will always be somewhat mystified by
  others, and by themselves as well. ...

  My guess is that mere technology will not kill the novel. ... Nor do I 
  believe that novels are bannable. ...  But novels can be sidelined --
  dismissed to the seraglio where they are read by women and children and
  have no effect on those in power.   When that happens, our society will
  be brutalized and coarsened by people who speak rather like us and look
  rather like us but who have no way of understanding us or each other."

3 Nov 2023

- *Thirteen Ways of Looking at the Novel* by Jane Smiley, 2005 (no link) -

  This is the same book as above but the theme of these
  excerpts is so different I put them in their own entry.

  From Chapter 5, The Psychology of the Novel, pages 84 -- 96:

  "The accessability of the novel renders critical interpretations
  superfluous to the reader/author interaction.  
  A novel *may* be read on all sorts of levels, as articles and controversies
  in scholarly journals show, but it can be enjoyably and correctly read
  just to see what happens next and to enjoy the company of the author,
  the narrator, and the characters.

  The novelist has many pleasures to offer -- the unusual pleasure of the
  exotic, the intellectual pleasure of historical understanding, the humane
  pleasure of psychological insight into one or more characters, the simple
  pleasure of entertainment and suspense, the exuberant pleasure of laughter
  and trickery, the guilty pleasure of gossip, the tempting pleasure of 
  secrecy and intimacy, the confessional pleasure of acknowledged sin and
  attempted redemption, the polemical pleasure of indignation, the rigorous
  pleasure of intellectual analysis, the reassuring pleasure of identification
  with one's nation or people, and the vicarious pleasure of romance. ...

  At the beginning of the "The Metamorphosis," Kafka has Gregor Samsa change
  into a bug, perhaps one of the most intruiging first premises in literature.
  However, in teaching this story twenty-two times ...
  I found that out of every thirty students,  one or two were simply
  unwilling to believe that Gregor could turn into a bug, and for
  those students, the story offered no charms at all ... (the other students)
  enjoyed the idea and suspended disbelief, and once they imagined Gregor's
  bugness, they were open to every other idea that Kafka had to offer.

  Willing suspension of disbelief is a strange state of mind -- reading
  nonfiction does not require it and neither does reading poetry, since
  both are based on logical argument.  Many educated and intelligent 
  persons resist it entirely ... the world is full of people who are 
  rather proud that they don't read novels.

  A literary education not only enlarges a reader's willingness to
  suspend disbelief by extending her range of pleasures, it also 
  strengthens her ability to enter the meditative state, and to be 
  receptive to the influence of another human mind, because it is a 
  state of contemplation that is essential to the true appreciation of
  the novel. ...
      Outside of literature, maybe the closest thing to this is guided
  meditation, where the voice of a guru suggests images and ways of 
  thinking that are intended to result in a particular state of mind. ...
  A novel, too, induces a contemplative state of mind, but rather than
  emptying it, it fills it with many different thoughts and feelings.
  Present with the reader in her mind is the individuality of the writer,
  whose idiosyncratic phrasing, ideas and emotions, fears and desires
  are guiding her and influencing her and inviting her to react.

  A page-turner offers the plesaure of suspense, but ... Relentless page
  turning gets the reader only where she knew she was going in the first 
  place, and it gets her there faster, without sufficient time to ruminate
  upon the qualities of the epic protagonist that make him or her interesting
  and worth reading about.

  Novels with a large component of travel narrative, such as *Moby Dick*, 
  are meant to meander so that the writer and reader can gaze at the 
  scenery and appreciate its exotic qualities.  One of the problems some 
  modern readers have with Melville is that they don't have the patience 
  to realize that the psychological and plot elements of his stories are
  intentionally set into a wide landscape that is meant ot comment upon 
  and contrast to the narrow intensity of human desires and preoccupations. ...

  

  
